Bitterroot Vallev, Montana.
June 209
I929
Is structural valley with neerly uniform width of 8 miles from
Missoula south to Hamilton.
Marrows south of Hamilton but retains
†renck-like character.
No spurs.
Mountain wall on west higher
and more precipitous than on east.
Very narrow gorges cut this
slope.
Cirques on the north slopes of the divides between and
plenty of snow at this date this year
The western wall shows two
facets at several places, an upper gentler sloped from the summits
dow half way or so, and a considerably stee er slope thence don
to the upper parts of the huge gravel fill in the structural
valley.
The fill is largely dissected and removed, most of the valley
cOntaining only the floodplain and lower terraces of the Bitterroot
River and gently sloping spurs andemnants of the big fill above
them.
At Florence, thepld gravel constitutes
shoulders and
terrace remnants up to 3600+ perhaps 3700 ft. A.I.
Thagravel
is not well worn.
Near the mouths of larger tributaries, ict is
coarse cobbly gravel.
Lower parts exposed in only one place seen;
the bluff east of the river a mile north of Florence.
Mere it is
aofanengfavelband sand, with a few clayey members Uhru more than a
hundred feet of thickness.
Apparently this isthe main river's
deposit and the doarser material in the shoulders nearer the valley
walls is locally derived from thehigh-gradient tributary streams
off the adjacent mountains.
The lower part of the bluff noted has markedly stained gravel.
Staining is a bright orange yellow and quite irregular.
Apparently
a ground water staining.
No weathered zones or coloring in the
section.
Most of the material is almost white.
Older gravel in the shoulders and high terrace remnants ranges
from 3300 to 3600 and perhaps 3700 and probably is thicker than
that.
Many tribs trenching this gravel deposit have broad,
gently sloped valleys but others seem to be so loaded that the neve
done but little deepening.
They simply descend the slope that
the river, by its erosion of 300 to 400 fast ih the deposit,
All shapes of this gravel are normal erosional forms.
has left.
V nothing here to even suggest the valley-mouth bars of the Snake.
There is
Records of
Lake Missoula are very scanty.
Definite shorelines
exist only on spurs of the shoulders, elsewhere they are very faint
tho readily dected at a distance.
The spur east of thriver bluff
noted obove has eight weak notches cut in a verticel range of 225 ft.
The strongest of these has a steepened slope about I0 feet high above
the old water line.
But at the best, it is a weak feature.
South of Florence, no shore lines were seen.
literature on
Someone in the
There are no lake deposits associated with these shorelines.
seen on the valley floor
Possibly thef/1½ silt deposit to he
And none
expected / on the valley floor hns been obliterated by subsequent
stream work.
fossibly silt once on the slopes has been washed off
by subsequent slope wash, possibly the shore lines are recessional ones
and tha silt was removed by the lowering level of wave work.
But if
Toke Missouls wes terminated by a bursting of the ice dam and a rapid
draining, these shore lines are a record of the rising tetel, not
the lowering.
No ice-fafted boulders identified on the shoulder above noted.


Under what conditions did Bitterroot Valley fill so deeply
with gravel?
Why is this gravel so fresh close to the surfece on the tops of
the remaining ridges?
tissoula. to Polson.
June 30m I929
the gravel Flat on which the city offrissouls stands and which
extends along the rond to Tolson for three or four miles is probably
a post lake stream flat.
There is no silt on it and no erosional
shapes in it.
This terrace is 88 ft, plus or minus, above the
river.
About five miles north of Missouls is an abandoned brick
plant, the clay for which came from a deposit of silt that is at
least 20feet thick •
The silt constitutes a rolling terrsce 30
feet or so higher then the grevel flat.
Its subdued scarp
seems to be an old river bluff eroded in the silt.
Material is
a pale pinkish tan, very well stratified, uniformly fine silt
It is clearly andefinitely
without gravel or sandhembers.
varved,
This isthe Lake Missoula silt!
It once was a continuous
fill andClerk Fork has since removed most of it.
More of this silt at intervals but only low dow in the valley.
Lerge eroded remnants of thebig gravel fill seen south of Missoula
yesterday here constitute shaulders 300/feet high.
There are
elso lower terraces. in the fill.
But all evidence visible indicated
that no silt mantle covers these terraces or lies on the shoulders.
It doesnt seem possible that the flatter surfaces could have
lost such a mantle andit fallows that no such mantle ever existed.
vet the shore lines are here, high above these terrace surfaces.
A big ice/floated boulder rests on the slope of one of these
terrace surfaces.
It iswest of the road, in plain sight.
The road climbs over the summit a little south of
Evaro.
Here the sumit is a narrow valley, perhaps structural.
No
evidence of the lake seen here. The low enou
Bribelt is on a broad gravel flat about 30% to 40 feet abive
the river Jocko River) which flows northward to join the Flathead.
There is no silt on the flat.
But the terrace seems to be
related to a rock barrier a mile or so north of town, thru which
the river has cut a narrow gorge.
Perhaps the gravel is post-
silt.
Perhaps silt underlies it and the stream, let down from
the silt fill, has been held up by the rock barrier.
North of this short gorge is a lower flat, approximately
the present fldod plain.
It is margined on the east by a terrace
of pale inkish silt about 30/or 40 fêet higher.
It is only
a remnant of the earlier complete silt floor.
mere the road leaves the railroad, a little north of Ravalli,
to climb over into the Rocky Mountain trench at st.
• Ignatius, Is
fine cut in the silt terrace, with the terrace top covered with
gravel.
Summit between Jocko Valley and Rocky It. trench, east of
Ravalli, is 3420 altimeter
A.T.)
It is a broad gap with
ress-covered rolling hills on which are good shore lines of the
lake,
Sumit saddle and lower slopes have numerous boulders
and stream-rolled cobbles.
Apparently they are berg deposits.
Many have good glacial markings.
Just down the north slope is moraine.
The knobs are subdued
and the depressions are largely swampy tracts tho two or three,
jet t not to the in 1007 resT belove the alad condo.
The upper
The ice does not


3
seem to have reached the summit.
Perhaps the abundant boulders
in the saddle are sotually glocially transported.
However,
scattered ones up a hundred foot higher, among the shore lines,
seem to show that berg lee left a good record above the level
reached by the moraine.
This is the Mission moraine, , noted by Davis.
Its highest
altidude here is 3545 A.T.The MTosion moroine is a massively
brond fenture which fills the entire floor of the trench at st.
Its local reflief is slight,
"gated tomaton, and for mil note into pasta, ration then a 74 dee or
Evúdences of the glacial origin of this
vite 10005 8 a
valley fill are I- till shown in numerous rond cuts, 2-boulders
strewn over it, some of them huge, all of them of Beltion rocks, L
3- aleciallv smoothed and striated surfaces of a surprisingly
larce number of these boulders,
A_ the moreinic sags and swells,
Dur DAis
Many sags contains small lakes and swamps.
There are
' no merts or atrdom erosion.
Davis says, but it was originally so,
По в одіол пота ро я диванев, 98
by the attock of rain and of streams since its deposition.
Two portions of the moraine may be distinguished, separated
by the broad swale now used by Post Greek Ninepipe Reservoir
is a broad flooded tract over the surface of the northern part.
The swale between the two portions is surely a sag between two
built-up tracts, a record of more rapid retreat than occurred
when the two broad ridges of the moraine were deposited.
The moraine topography extends as far north as Crow Creek, I4
or I5 miles north of
St. Tomatius.
It blends imperceptibly
into a plain about Ronan, a plain which has no distinctive features.
The south front of the Mission moraine is at the town.
Mission Creek skirts it along its southern edre and crosses a vart of
It to reach Flathead River.
The little patch of moraine
on the northward slope of theaddle between Ravalli and St.
Ignatius
is the highest part of the moraine yet seen.
A most puzzling feature of the moraine is the total
V
absence
of lake silt on it, while Post Creek sag contains a large fill,
making a conspicuous flat abutting rather abrutly against the
northern member of the moraine.
This flat is out to a depth
of forty feet by the creek.
The material is the same pale
sentiaoomalts vanded contsinins large boulders of doe/merked
Shore lines of Lake Missoula are present on the
slopes of the Trench, tho they are faint.
so up to 4200,
They doubtless
certainly thay are away above the moraine surfaces.
vet the gilt deposit falls I80 feet short of the top of the northern
member of the moraine.
V
It is quite impossible that here the silt once covered the
moraine and hassince been eroded off.
The surface of the m
moraine certainly would receive a silt deposit from the glacial
Lake which deposited the Post Creek silt if the moraine was there at
the time andif the lake covered the moraine.
A few miles north of Ronan is a rolling topography on the
surface of the valley fill, very much like the Mission moraine
in appearance tho it hag very few undrained depressions.
the meterial is silte some of which iqfinely lominated.
Bu t
It is
almost as fine as taloum powder and certainly loot a wind-drifted
deposit.
which has been rather evenly buried in silt.
It looks exactly as should a morainic topography


But see Elmo
Dais ago it is starsely strums with
wulders"
4
Nerrer Folson but well south of thebig Polson moraine, the
elevations bro more widely septrated andlook like sand dunes migrating
toward the east.
Their material also appears to be of dune
anda materiel. texture.
The Lolson monoline is a prominent fasture, seon sevoral miles
awey.
It is a fine ridge moraine rising perhaps 50 feet above
the plain and descending 3 or 4 times as fer down its northern
slope to Flathead Takes
There are no boulders on its surface,
and almost no boulders in its composition. ^ Its material is
very largely of stream gravel, in notable ontrast with the Mission
moraine which has very abundant, very angular boulders.
The Polson moraine crosses the Rocky Mountain trench from
side to side, just enclosing the south end of Flathead Jake.
Its
relation to the lake depression and to the broad plain in front of
it is like the situation at the south end of Pend Oreille Lake.
But free drainage away from the Flathead Lobe could occur onLy
Not enough yet seen of the Polson moraine to say
with dirt.inty that there was no free drainage when this moraine
Polson to Kalispell
July I
I929
The Rocky untain Trehch terminates rather abrutly south
of St. Ignatius.
Northward as far as Kalispell, it is a very
strongly marked feature, containing the large Flathead Lake (2900. A.I.
in its lowest part.
Theeast wat is an almost unbroken mountain
front north from St.
Ignatius to Big Fork near the north end o f the
lake.
This is Mission Range,
At Big Fork is a gap, where
the Mission Range apparently discontinues and theswam Range ,
east of the Mission, comes in to margin the valley.
Its front
is equally abrupt.
Mission Range seems wholly of Belt rocks,
dipping eastward away from the trench.
This indicates its
origin as a fault valley.
The west side of the trench has lower mountains with spurs and
lower hills out into the trench.
No topographic suggestion for a
fault scarp here.
Neither side of the mike shows silt terraces and almost no
silt in any cuts.
In notable contrast with Kootenay and Okanogan
lakes.
Yet at the northern end there is a great silt plain
extending from side to side and northward as far as Kalispell st
least.
Probably much farther.
The surface of this pdain is
perhaps 50 feet on the average above the lake, tho at Big Fork on
Swan River debouchure, a good silt section is exposed in a terrace
whose summit is about 75 feet above the lake.
TheKolispel silt plain has sags and undrained depressions in it,
as tho it mentled a morainic surface.
It has also some steep
like ice contact slopes, in it.
And there are some steer
icefcontact slopes down to the lake level between Big Fork and Creston.
The surface of the plain bears some definite river channels
across it.
mo this gilt plain apparently does not all break off in
steep slopes at the northy end of the lake, it seems to be another
profile than that of the lake bottom and to be related to the lake
depression as at Kootenay and Okanogen.
Instead of te silt
surface lemminating descending below the lake surface, it seems
terminate up in the air;
at the higher level and had been eroded.
as tho it once had continued farther
to
But, of course, n o
com lete silt plain at this level ever existed in the valley for


5
the basin Is impossible by any erosion which could remove the
It seems that we must
silt there and leave it about Kalispel.
V onl1 for a blook of stormentio determine the lake basin at the
time the ice was all melted Any in the vicinity of Kalispel so that
the silt could acoumulate there in lake veters.
There are kame piles and morainio hills about the margins of
the Kalispel plain.
They form a nearly continuous line alsong
the east side.
Tho the silt plain abuts against them and in some
W cases nenrly surrounds them, none were found with silt on top of
the
gravel or till.
It seems Impossible to explain this by any other
concention than that the ponded water, in which the silts were
deposited, did not reach much higher on their slopes than the silt
now does.
If this be correat, then the higher shore lines do not
belong to the silt depositing leke or lakes.
No shore lines seen long the xocky and forested east side of
the lake.
None on the west side north of Dayton.
But the
mountain sur along the north side of the bay at this place has a
dozen well-marked benches in 300 to 500 feet of vertical .
They
are about equally marked at all altitudes and come down fairly
close to the lake level.
The uppermost one, however, is a
constructional bench and some kind of Pleistocene deposit mantles
the slope here for most of the way down.
Tere the note-writing was dropped for a limb up this mountain
well to know from closer observation what was here.
Results show
clearly the inadvisability of ever de ending on lonstrange observation.
V
The only shore lines about Davion Bay are 65 and I80 feet above
June high water in the lake.
They are at benches only, are
interrupted by valleys andfullies and are none too distinct.
But
they have flats in places several hundred feet wide, tho the cliffs
are low.
Above I80 feet above the lake, the regular benches are
moraine terraces•
Scrutinized more carefully from a distance
after the examination in detail, they feil to show a real horizontal-
ity.
They are irregularly undulatory in a minor way and also
@evert from level lnnes in the length of half a mile or so.
There
are ten or twelve fairly definite features of this sort in a vertical
range, by aneroid, of 1300 feet (not 300 to 400 feet).
The
hithest is the best developed.
It is 25 to I50 fast wide at
the terrace-like top.
There is morainic sag and swell topography
on this top, three definite rigges in one place occupying it
The highest of these minor ridges is 35 feet above the general
summit.
Some of the sags are undrained depressions.
This highest moraine bench descends westward a hundred feet in
a little less than a mile.
Rock knobs on the slope below it
bear striae and roundings on the east sidg and top, but the west
edges are plucked into ragged forms.
hefice therefore moved
westward here up the valley of the bay out of the Rocky Mountain
Trench.
The altitude of the highest bench close to the open lake
valley is 4200/ft. A.T.
Typical till is exposed in numerous nearly
bare furrows or shallow gilches.
Drift is found higher than this moraine terrace, both erratics
and striated stones being present.
But no morainic forms occur
above, while for more than a thousand feet below (vertical)
the mountain side is marked by weaker but definite morainic benches.
It is curious that these morainic terraces are difficult to see
when on them.
The best evidence of them is the presence of flats
in the re-entrants and minor velleys.
yet by erosion.
These are hardly trenched
correspond with the
The s urs of shoulders do not carry notches, to
moraine terraces,
found on high shore lines on sihilar slopes.
in anything like the expression


Terther around the compound bay, at the hood marked by almo,
this assemblage of moraine terraces Assumes the magnitude of a
great unit moraine in huge flutings and terrocings, some of the
torraces carrying kame-like piles 50 to 75 feet high.
This
lobe pushed twofmiles or more west of thghead of the bay,
its
crest fully a mile and a half west of the bay and 3550 ft. A.To,
650 feet above theflake.
This 1s about 6 miles forther along
the generalissed edge of thetinthead lobe, a descent of 650 ft.,
or about 100 feet to the mile.
Thinner slone of this fine crescentic moraine issplendidly
makked by a number of subparallel rides in descending series,
doubtless thohomologue of the moraine terraces north andeast of
Dayton.
The north horn of the main crest of the crescent is
separated from thomountain slopes by a very definite fosse, bare
rook walls facing steep moraine slopes.
the bottom of thefosse
midle of theferescent moraine is not as well developedon thehhorns
as are lower members.
More of this high moraine banked up on the west walls of Flathead
Lake valley shows east of the hivay were it crosses a high addle
between this bay and Polson.
Its upper surface is very cleorly mand
as a terrace which descends southward along the mountain.
This
hill between hiwey and lake must have protruded thru theßce at the
time this massive moraine veneer was deposited.
Traced still farther south, this assemblage of morainic
terraces and ridges leads out along the southwest corner of thel-ke
to blend with the Polson moraine wh9se summits rise 350 feet above
V
the lake.
A large sag occupied by Flathead river.
It separates
the main Polson moraine from the truly massive southern pert o f
the terrace-ridge system.
This sag must be constructional.
It may record a rather narrow extension of the lathead Lake lobe
toward the southwest.
If this be correct, then the
Polson moraine
lying south and-west of the lake is and town is but the extension
of a moraine from thefast side of the valley diagonally across
toward the southwest, and is not truly the frontal part of the
lobe's great ridged deposit.
A broad flat of very fine, uniform, stratified silt lies
along Tlathead River in thesag to the southwest of the loke. It is
good evidence that the sag is constructional.
The surface of
this silt lout 75 feet, meximum, above the surface of the lake,
v Toward the lake, , it drons off steeply.
Vicinity of
Pol son
July 2
029
Several corrections in yesterdays's/notes to be made.
moraine system about Polson is not as simple as first thot.
The
me Tlathead River does not flow thru the mag noted yesterday,
it outs thru the moraine about two miles nearer the diddle or
The sag floor rises westward, the moraine terraces
banked against the west vall of the valley gradually fade out and the
mass of moraine hills that,
velley, become the main moraine.
from lolson, seem to stand out in the
The relief in this part of the
moreine, 3 miles west of Polson, is I00 feet and its expression
1s a confused assemblage of hills and hollows, thills, in series,
constituting rather prondynced ridges oriented nearly north-south
me highest altitude secured on the Polson moraine vest of tow n is
pincehnd must have descended 200 feet or so very
Pinthend Tilver first crossed the Polson noreitsethyu a low


7
4
stup
down the frontel slone.
Cutting into the 1111 the stream found
itself superposed on a buried rook h111 andÿnto this it
155 nOT
out a short, picturescue corre about s0oft. deep (maximm
This
stretch of unids is to be the site of a power and irriga
i on dam.
On the north side of the rider here is an irregular series
bees assoointed with rock ledges over which the
he morn
§ me of the channel forms in mock suggest
V
cutting of thie gorge, is the cause of
65 and I80 feet above present l-ke level
to be one or two minor ones also at Dayton, and
Uh es
their explanation here.
But there are no store lines of Lake Missoula on the
110710
ine ns -hove described.
The shore lines ar0 visible
nan;
slopes west of the moraine and, indeed, they come up into the
angle between the volley walls and the crescentic moraine.
But
they
ere not detectibl on its slones anywhere.
Thonoraine is either
contempor neous with the lake or is younger.
In either case, the
shores would not exist on the moraine.
Outide of this very strongly marked and ver youthful mornine is
great silt plain in the Flathead Valley.
The river has trenched
deeply into it and on the north, tributery drainage has dissected it
into a similitude of badlands.
The altitude of the plain is about
2900, essentiolly the level of Plathead Lake.
vet there could have
been no lacustrine connection between Flathead Lake basin and this
basin west of the moraines
Probably there was only a narrow gorge
in till with perhaps the beginning of cascades over the highest rock
ledges.
This silt around the south end of the lake reaches at
least 75 feet higher.
A mile and a half farther west, in front of the Polson moraine,
is a strong ridge reaching southward from the high rock hills to
the river.
It isfery bulky where crossed by the east vest road.
It has a high hill in it just messros north of the road, a hill that
may be determined by a buried rock elevation.
Tor a mile north of
this, it id a curving ridge.
Its highest part is at its junction
with the rock hills, altitude 3430, or is the mid-length hill whose
altitude was not secured.
This ridge is a moraine.
It
contains abundant rock that is not local, some fragments striated,
it has at least five shallow undrained depressions on its ammit.
and
It is two and a half miles long and quite dissimilar to the other
valley spurs of thedistrict.
sag and swell morainie topogramby of the Polson moraine!
It Lacks the freshmessncprominence of
clerly to be older.
It Is cens
V to theporti.
Drift extends as a thin mantle up to 4000% feet on therock hills
Above this altitude there ispnly local rock.
highest shoreline of lake Missoula, altitude about 4200,
The
it of this hill.
hear the sum
Not well marked when one is on it but plain enouch
when seen from below.
~ so than at Missoula.
many lover strands well marked the not more
and 3600.
I of them on the old moreine between 3200
If It were not for contrest in greeness of grass on the
ridges and seperoting sags, most of thesephorolines would be undetected
Afternoon.=*
eltitudes of 3380,
The Polson moraine, south of town, les maximum
500 feet above the lake at its northern bose,
The vigorous expression found this morning ispresent here also.
No
moraine that I recall more closely resembles the Polson than does the
Coulee City moraine near Withrow.
outer ridge of this moraine if it were projected across the river
the dam elte on the st'ver is almost exrotly on the line of the
trench.


8
Juch find-drifted sand mantles thehoraine nenr the railroad and
highey crossings.
No continustion of theolder moraine was identified on the 4
southeast side of the river.
It may be that the descending crest of
the older moraine carries It below the t11,1, silt and outwash of the
younger on the east of the river.
The older feature comes all the
way to the river and is there scarped by the river in its present
trench.
There are several lore isolated bills, , mostly of vock bu
but drift-covered, out in the valley south of Pablo Reservoir.
One
sroup isel. elongnted neorly eastfiest and might conceivably represent
the course of the moraine.
The feeder ditch for the Fablo Reservoir crosses a broad,
10%
Urnet in front of the Polson moraine, a tract closed off from the river
immediately to thevest br the southernmost of the Folson moraine's
hills.
Thecanal excavations show a stratified clay or silt on this
vplain.
Attitude is 3200 or mores
This isthe highest silt yet
found, considerably higher than any other.
If, as nonseems probable,
the silt of these valleys of western Montana exists only in the lower
places and is not sound associated tith the higher shorelines,
then
this high silt is a product of a local lake in front of the moraine,
a waterbody which never was a part of the lake farther west where the
great plain of silt occurs in front of the Polson moraine.
Take Missouls ghorelines do occulon the south face of the Jolson
moraine south of the lake.
Their development issimilar to those
elsewhere in the valley, except that the higher levels are not present
because the morained reaches only to 3400.
But their existence =
proves that the Polson moraine iseither older than, or contemporaneous
with, Lake Missoula.
It certainly isnt younger.
If the Folson
moraine is Wisconsin in age, as seems obvious from its strength of
development and its freshness, then Lake Missoula is Wisconsin in
If both the Mission andthePolson glaciaions saw a lake Missoula
V then intlate of tho tri soonsin gladiation was at least as deep as the
The high hills rising in midvalley south of the Fablo Reservoir
carry the lake shorelines to their summits.
22 shores can be count-
ed on the highest hill and its height above the lain is less than
1000 feet.
Dunes are prominent about three miles south of Tablo, their
material typical dune sand.
Farther southeast is the tract described
a day or so ago as silt-mantled morainic topography.
The material
in the low hills of this tract is truly a silt and istruly horizontally
stratified, so far as excavations showed.
Yet it seens very probable
thet this idawindrift silt, representing the dust deposits to the
lee of the dune tract.
Thebltitude here is 3000 to 3I00, bather
hich for correlating with the Post Creek silt or the
silt, or the Revelli silt.
l'lathead Valley
And just to thesouthward and no higher,
~ the till plain of thevalley issilt-free.
Another moraine h the Rocky Mountain Trench seems a neeessary
pert of this interpretation.
morainic topocraphy
Nine Piße Reservoir is on a definite
with numerous kettles containina swamps and
Lekelets.
Its oltitude is about 3000.
From this it slopes steep-
Ir enough to the south, down to Post Creek, to make the highway grade
noticeably steep.
Looking south from
tIe south offit,
the Reservoir, or a point
lower tract
the whole valley floor levell beldw one.
which Fost Creek drains.
It isthis
The creek is 260 feet lover
then thereservoir along the highway, and the silt plein along the
V creek 18 phout 200 feet below.
way crossing 19 2760
Altitude of the creek at the his


4
V
South of
Post Cheeks the surfece of the till deposit rises
graduolly to a moximum of
100 feet above the stream or 50 to 60 feet
above the silt plain.
This is about a mile south of the creek.
Tho morninic, its kettles are much less pronounced and are less num-
This contrast in
erous than on the line Pipe Roservoir morpine.
oltitude and in chorecter, and the broad silt-filled sag between, seen
to indicate
Iwo different moraines.
No silt seen in tission Crook veller at st. Ignatius.
A1 titude
here is 3940
Summit of the saddle between Revalli and St. Tonatius is 3I60 AT
It is essentially the upper limit of the fission moraine.
The terrace of silt in Jocko Fiver Valley, where the highary
homing the olimb to this seddley is covered with revel.
the other
termeees silt terrnces thence almost to Arles, lying at thesame approx
imate altitude, all record a river flat eroded in silt,
original upper surface of the silt filling.
Evidence for this is
to be seen in the tributary valley radlowed by the highway up from
Ravalli.
Ilere definite lorge ronnants of the silt ocour up to 2830,
considerably higher than the terrace top.
A section about three miles suth oravalls istery interesting.
Silt, fine sand, coarse sand, gravel and 'rubble are here intimately
associated, tho the quantity of/silt is small.
There clearly was
vigorous stream action here at times and a definite current most of
the time.
It seems that this place was very close to the shoreline
of bonded water in Jocko Valley.
But its altitude itfar below the
faint strand lines and probably is lower than the highest silt up the
trib foldowed by the hivay out ofRavalli toward st. Ignatius.
There
V is nothing resembling the pebbly or gritty silt of Snake River valley
here.
Ravalli is
A.T.
Campbell has a comment on
this section in the NPR guidebook bulletin, I think.
The silt remnants in the gulch northeast of Ravalli ought to be
good evidence that there has been no silt deposit much above present
silt plains, since completely removed.
If silt would remain in this
V
n rrow gulch, it would remain on the broad flattish slopes that were
submerged in Lake Missoula.
Vicinity oflissoula
July 3
I929
There is an extensive silt plain out in Clark Fork Valley west of
Missoula andfast of the river.
Two big meander scars In It, each
three or four square miles in area.
The silt iskt least 30 feet
thick.
It ispale pink to buff in color, well-varved with 20 varves
to the foot for one typical measurement.
The surface of the plain
remnant iddissected by broad drainage swales.
The altitude of the
V summit is3200.
North of Grass Valley idmother dissected terrace remnant ofsilt,
85 feet above the meander scar at its base.
In this there are out-
crops of an older gravel resting on bedrock.
24 varves to the
foot is a fair average for this silt.
There are terrace fragments at intervals to Nine Mile.
Here the
silt terrace is II0 feet above the floodplain.
Its composition
is silty sand, only slightly cohesive when dry.
Varving is not
shown, tho there isniform horizontal stratification.


10
Near Nine-Mile, , the river leaves its structural valley and
begins its long canyoned course thru the Bitterroots.
Notable
narrowing, crookedness, slip-off slopes and rock terraces all tell of
an erosional, rather than a structural valley.
In this valley are
the silt terraces but ally outs seen exposed a ssandy, rather than sil-
ty material.
Near Colden. the terrace top is about I00 feet above
the river and only the upper thirty feet or so is silt.
Gravel lies
beneath.
No varved silt seen west of Nine Mile.
Instead, the
narrow valley contains terraces of gravel within the range of the silt
terraces farther up valley.
They do not look as old as the silt
terraces, however, for they have suffered very little gullying while
the silt terrace tops are all rolling with broad drainage trenches.
Perhaps the difference in materials will account for this.
Thompson Fallsand eastward
July 43 I$29
The "moraine" that Davis describes here is a very exceptional fea-
ture of valley fill and must be seen in more detail.
It has
V numerous enormous blocks of rock in its riverward face and no nearsy
cliffs or knobs to yield them.
It has a rolling topography with
minor undrained depressions that look morainic.
But it is essent-
ially a great terrace on the north side of the broad valley here.
Wind-drifted sand covers most of the top and according to Alden
(personal information) the accumulation of this sand in low dunes misl-
led Davis.
Perhaps, even probably, there is such mounding on the
larger feature but how to get the enofmous boulders moved by the Clark
Fork #latheed is a problem.
There are no such boulders farther up-
stream for at least 25 miles, and tho there is a fine mid-valley rock
butte a few miles upstream, there are no such boulders associated with
it.
Nor are there any sheer cliffs at Thompson Falls to yield 8-a
Davis calls this
such fragments.
Even if the mountain slopes could have yielded ‡h
the Wroder-Wecksvill
them, they are almost a mile distant from them, out in mid-valley.
A picturesque narrow gorge lies upstream from the broad valley at
Thompson Falls.
osional pure and simple; a cut between two
Narrows.
structural depressions above and below it.
Splendid gravel terraces upsteam from Thompson Falls for several
miles, related apparently to downcutting of the rock barrier and
"moraine" barrier at Thompson Falls.
North of Plains, a wide structural valley leads north from the si
river valley.
Its mouth contains a great terrace of clay or silt,
120 feet high in its scarp.
The material is very dense, dark in
color, granular in texture and with small pebbles and coarse sand
grains in it.
texture or lamination.
It lees no laminae.
in color,
A mile or so east of Phains is the typical glacial silt in
terraces 40 feet and more in height, perfectly laminated and well
varved, pale buff or pinkish in color.
The nipped spurs, taken by Davis to record glacial erosion in
Clark Fork Valley, are very prominent as far up as Perma.
There
seems no ddbat but that the spurs were originally longer and that they
have been truncated in some way.
cate the spurs of its own valley here dand there
Normal stream work might trun-
but could not produce
the straightened course from its own original lyshoulder-marked valley.
Only a vast increase in volume of a stream. suffieient to make the
valley a channel. could do this
Faulting can hardly be held
responsible for the dropped block would necessarily have to fit the
with of the valley precisely, the fault trace everywhere lying dong t
the bases of the clipt spurs.
explenation, except that of D vis.
And there is no other conceivable
es, there is
Sectankee 1942


Another feature of the valley where the trunnated spurs exist
is the multitude of rugged rock knobs andhills that lie a little
inside the valley walls.
Some are not far from central in posi-
They seem
tion tho most of them are close to the clipt spurs.
very much like the iggegular rook knobs in glaciated valleys in
northern Washington and southern British Columbia.
They dont agree
with no Verban brosion grotiends or tho faulting hypothed 100-
They
do not cour above the gorge-like valley below Perms.
ruled surfaces were seen on any of them.
But the most interesting and most puzzling forms seen between
Plains and Perma are the high-leval fills in the larger steep-grade
gullies.
At least a dozen well marked ones are shown on the north
side of the valley.
They are thot by Parade to be deltas built in
Lake Missoula.
Campbell accepts this explanation but Davis calls
them lateral moraines of his ice tongue.
One of these was examined in detail.
It lies just back of the
round-house at Pgradise.
It is a broad fill, the summit I200 feet
wide and nearly as long along the ghich length.
This summit is
nearly flat but is 40 feet above the contact with valley walls.
From
the summit, the slope down the gulch is very steep, about as steep as
the debris will lie.
It is all grassed, however, no sliding places
and no washes interrupting the slope.
This steeply sloping front
descends essentially to the valley floor, becoming narrower and more
gently sloping in the terminal part untti it is a rather inconspicuous
fill.
Upgulch from the summit, the surface drops off alymptly to a
closed depression containing a pond I00 feet acress.
The pond sur-
face is 80 feet below the broad summit but since the deposit is lower
on the valley sides, the closed depression is only 40 feet deep.
The deposit is alre ‡ composed of local rock; diorite and the Belt
sedimentaries.
No foreign fragments were found.
Some of the
pebbles and cobbles are rounded but most of the material is angular to
subangular.
A great deal of bouldery material is present, even out
on the summit.
The summit is 800 feet above the valley floor.
Campbell says "at least 400 feet".
Farther upstream, the am enclosed flat rises into a Dubbly fill
that occupies the bottom of the gulch.
It is higher in the middle
in plate other such forms like warn the next three miles domstream.
alluvial cone in the gulch.
Two of them occur at about the same altitude.
half as high.
One ishardly more than
Two have been trenched and one has a gully down its
front.
One has a definite slope of its crest along the valley,
descending upstream.
Others above Paradise as far as Perma, on both sides of the valley,
generally about 800 feet atove the river, but in a general way lower
with increasing distance upstream.
depressions back of then.
It ishot know if they have
Te I found one of these features along the scabland channel routes
I would call it A bara
Yet they are not composed of stream gravel
and are far higher up on the valley slopes than any bar known.
the one examined ishot a delta is clear.
That
That these little gulches
could have such prominent deltas in a lake whose shorelines are so
weak as are Missoula"s seems impossible.
gulches should preserve deltas seems also impossible.
that only these little
lateral moraines?
Are tleey
aced.
(nor do they carry L. Missoula shorelines)
Their forms are not hummocky or moraine-terr-
Yet they are
limited to that part of the valley which possesses the clipt spurs.
Whatever they are, they are not typical of any recognized land forms.


But this was
net shower.
Evaro pass is 3958
, 750 It. above the uffer limit o sill
• MI
plain at Misula
Sent it
my silt there this
pass
siltplein?
on the invernediase Motes
undeniable do born rear the pass + de
There dates
duly by e surly sutricling lake could it hame Ken semand
considers
utility halt from
lea al davira m Ditterrack + Cabuck to be
i
SE
E
O]
to
di
wi
va
th
in


12
V
The Lake Missoula silts are I50 feet thick at Dixon.
typical of other silt sections thus far seen, except those 3 miles
They are
south of Ravalli.
Much fine sand in which there is very little co-
hesion and doubtful varving.
one to three inches thick.
If varved, the individual layers are
sit at Dixon is 2650 ft. A.T.
The altitude of the top of the silt depo-
The silt scarps and terrace flats
are very conspicuous about this place.
As a broad valley fill,
silt deposit extends up the Flathead fof several miles.
the
much dissected.
It isnow
It is probably continuous with the silt plain west
of the older moraine west of Polson, alt. 2900, tho if so the surface
But this was V
of the silt rises in that direction 250 feet in about 20 miles.
not shoo.
If there is a continuous silt plain here, then the water levels
(if there has been no warping since deposition necessary to account for
the silt plain west of Poison was 250 feet above the silt plane at Dix-
on.
The hypothesis which seeks to account for the absence of silt
on all valley slopes of the region above the valley bottom silt plain
by the conception of silt surface marking the water surface (the lake
siltingh% full)
fails here.
It fails also for the 3200 foot silt
plain north of Missoula unless that was a local lake dammed by Davis's
Thompson Falls ice tongue.
This stretch of 20, miles along the ID
Flathead should be seen.
If the hypothesis fails, then thesilt of the
these valleys may ›well be Lake Missoula silt, tho why it does not ass
occur on the gravel flats and gentle slopes between the valley floors
and the higher shore lines iskemtained.
Charlo is on the Post Creek, moraine.
A section in till 60 feet
thick shows along lower lower Post Greek where the railroad follows
the creek for a short distance.
This till weathers into hoodoo
forms exactly like the till at Flathead Falls west of Podgon.
Its
color is the same, as is its content of rolled cobbles and pebbles.
It has a reddened upper zone three or four feet thick, tho the color
is faint.
This till goes under the silt plain to the west at about
2640.
This upper limit of silt agrees closely with that just west.
east of Dixon (2650).
The slope of the moraine here is very smooth
and even.
It is a definite descent to the west as well as to Post
Creek and Mission Creek to the south.
Undrained depressions are
not uncommon.
But why there should be no silt on the moraine higher
then 2650 (about) when it is 2900 a few miles west of Polson is a
puzzle.
Why isthere no silt along Clark Fork west of Plains?
Espec -
Vially in the broad valley about Thompson Falls, there should be silt.
Why is there none is the vicinity of St, Regis?
How did the silt r
7
in the terraces north of Missoula get there?
• Only by remaining in
suspension in a lake and a lake that had but two narrow connections,
Evaro and the back-habided St. Regis turn, with the water that was in
open connection with the Flathead icelobe.
If Davis isight about glaciation at Thompson Falls and upstream
to Perma, might not this bring ice sufficiently near to the Missoula
district to explain the puzzle?
Yet, even so, the St. Regis region
without silt isbetween.
Ohhy by removing the silt in the narrow
valley about St. Regis by subsequent stream erosion can the absence of
this deposit be explained.
To prove Davis right, till andglaciated surfaces must be found
in Clark Fork Valley between Thompson Falls and Perma.


A hatter he
Peruna + back lif the sight- ngled were taward bit Refs easel
liseal
Matheus wall de that David in soree at Paradies t
lial
Villus
exiefl
per the Bar minsula silt . Here in in than
Pablo R
- a sunell patch on the maine-filled Dated
Ru Betterset Waiter Made rein a He chang
Aloudes come
tee
the
• Per suite, tus the shorelines.-
jasmine.
I lake
to recent alt
was there + the valley
But anch a lube, sner simi iMe chore. 3240,
essenhal
4. so , must heme an
Soutlet to mankun ith unstant +
lone -continued.
leil.
the oily miket,
alvare the edae o
Du in dan
solution.for u are lean de Firelegit-s very entert.
oy
Rue dortilleran
Unque dorstetating the dan would be canid
cray
- Here the willet of wauld mist it so m Tonila f te
never lake.
Silt thas must be patter from load glairs
in de Bitterrunts
+ dabinett
My terest rieks
be lines
then mus
shor
stil
lake
head
comb
of ri
Fork
lake
2550
silt
the
lower
sence
been
the
to 32
high
Y at
to St
highw
east
y eve
Creek
evide
divid
miles
the e
ly id
a lar
ridge
north,
Here
altitu
is 350
along
It is
ern fa
Its to
flat h
the ea
contra
of Boy
well-d
a kind
seems
a delt


13
Let us conceive that the lend Oreille ice dam gave way after the
still blocked.
heads.
lake would lower only to 2550 (about), the altitude of the channel hos
If the gravel floor south of Lake Pend Oreille, or some
combination of ice still in the valley south of Lake Pend Oreille endwill
of rock shoulders or moraine or gravel, kept the level upstream in Clark
Fork Valley (Lake Pend Oreille and upstream higher tan 2500. then the
lake would lower only from 4200 Geagowd-tigaä4 to some figure above
2550
This might be conceivably high enough to cover the 2900
silt west of Polson, the 2800 silt or Post Creek and the 3200 silt of
the Missoula district.
The conditions during this hypothetical
lower stage, and the duration of that stage, might then explain the ab-
sence of silt higher than theflats noted
Yet, unless there has
been tilting these silt deposits should all be the same or at least
the southern nes should be no higher.
For if silt was deposited
to 3200 near Missoula, far from the edge of the ice, it should be as
high near the Polson moraine,
The National Bison Range is an almost isolated hill group in the
Y at the south end of the Rock Mountain Trench.
One arm reaches
to St. Ignatius, the other to Dixon.
It is an inverted Y.
The
highway crosses thelow saddle between these hills and the mountains
east of Ravalli and Arlee.
even in the saddle, by/Missoula shorelines.
The hill group is marked on all sides,
Plains to Elmo
July
6
I929
A large lobe of glacial ice has occupied thevalley of Lynch
Creek which mouths into Clark Fork just west of this town.
"The
evidence is in the splendid morainic topography that lies on the
divide between Lynch Creekyland Boyer Creek to theeast and about three
miles north of Clark Fork valley.
The moraine lies well up on
the east wall of Lynch Creek valley and isleasily seen, tho not clear-
ly identified,from the valley floor main road.
Near the top, it is
a large moraine terrace with several depressions between it andthe rocky
ridge crest.
One short kame-like sharp ridge.
A little farther
It crowds completely are the anestndnto Pay To preek. valley he
northlt has strong development into kame and kettle topography.
altitude of the moraine bench on the east wall of Lynch Creek valley
is 3500.
Over in Boyer Creek, the hiway fallows the edge and climbs up
along the slope of a singular deposit associated with this moraine.
It is omposed of cobbles and boulders entirely.
Its steep east-
ern face is a veritable talus slope, largely barren of vegetation.
Its top islat and not far from level, standing at about 3500.
This
flat has shallow kettles in it.
The whole feature is elongate along
the east face of the moraine topping the divide and is in strong
contrast, as a constructional feature, with the opposite (east) wall
of Boyer which istypically furrowed into minor drainage ways of a
well-developed valley.
The flat seems to be an outwash feature,
a kind of pitted plain.
The sub-rounding of many of the fragments
seems to point to the sameconclusion.
But it seems much more like
a delts then any other form that outwash could take in this situation.


14
v
Dog or Rainbow Lakeisblearly dammedby moraine at the west.
That this moraine come from thelsame ice as that on
divides clear for the characteristic topography istraversed all
the way (about 4 miles) between.
the BoyerfLynch
the south walk, enclosing swamps and lakelets.
The morainic ridges lie up against
Ice seems to have
been as far as the east end of the lake for here the surface between
lake and rock wall to the south is highest out away from the walls and
it slopes down decidedly toward the talus from the cliffs.
moraine.
Noyhotable range in character of debris was seen in any of this
grained quartzite and argillite.
Most of it is composed of pale greenish to grayish fine-
Diorite is also present.
Indeed, diorite knobs project thru themoraine on the summit of the
Boyer-Lynch divide.
But none of the Siyeh limestone, none of thee
red saccharoidal quartzite cobbles, none of the bright green and bright
maroon argillites that are so conmon in the Flathead Valley drift.
The material is but little worn, almost all is sharply angular or very
slightly subangular.
No striae found on any fragments.
There are three possibilities for the source of this ice.
allow the distribution in altitude noted.
A11
I- A lobe of Cordilleran
ice crossed the relatively low divide at the head of Lynch Creek.
bed in theheadwaters of Lynch C.eek.
2- A local glacier develop-
3- Davis's Clark Fork
glacial tongue pushed back up Lynch Creek.
The first explanation seems altogether the most probable tho there
should be a greater variey of debris by this hypothesis, unless the
basal debris from the north was trapped back of the Lych Creek divide
and only the upper, cleaner ice came across and got its material
locally.
The second explanation is impossible for it requires glaciation
of large volume at lower altitudes than any glaciati on whatever is
known to have occurred elsewhere in this part of Montana.
The third explanation needs to be looked into rather carefully
before it is discarded.
But more field examination must be made fi
first.
Silt in Lynch Creek valley is I70 feet thick and its upper surface
is 2660 A.I.
Much of it isfine sand but there are thick members of
varved clay of exceedingly fine grain.
If the right moisture content
ispresent, it can be shaved as thin as paper.
This silt terrace is
the same one which yielded the tough, dense, pebbly clay, from another
cut, a few days ago.
Except for theunusual character of the first
sample taken, this large thick terrace is typical of the glacial lake
silts in this region .
A large structural valley extends northward from Perma on the
Flathead as far as Nierada.
It isnarrowed and interrupted by hills
and spurs of bedrock near Niarade and is completely severed between
Comes Prainie and Hot Springs by a wash small, narrow range of bills
whose lowest pass (Markle Pass)
about 400 feet above the flat floor
of thevalley to the north.
The southern halfofthis valley (or the southern valley of these
two) isknown as Camas 'Prairie.
Its lowest part, at the south end,
is only three or four miles from the Flathead and is not much more
than 200 feet higher, if it is that much.
Thefloor rises toward
the east side and the north end.
Expos ures show stratified gravel.
Plenty of boulders lle on the surface, some of them striated.


15
V
V
thorising floorof this plain of washed gravel terminstes at the
north, dlose to the transverse range of hills, against a splendid
group of moraine terraces of ridges lying along the sudas southern
slope of the hills.
From the south, it looks as tho a glacial lobe
had pushed northward against this transverse ridge but when the pass
is crossed, itlis at once clear that thetice came from the north and
pushed just across the hills and down to the north end of Camas
Prairie.
youngest, not the oldest.
It" ather words, thonighost we themes no terraces are the
describtim Julu 7
Silt from the Perma terraces extends part way up the creek
toward Camas Prairie but none was seen on the Prairie.
separated by rather
ales be Pain 1 if bit 06 read seaband with agued bare buttes.
deep rock basins.
to the pass alone; there is no channel form down across the moraine
terraces of ridges.
Glacial water evidently spilled southward across
this pass but it must have entered standing water on Camas Prairie a
little below the Pass and above the moraine terraces.
There should
be a deltaic deposit recognizable here.
Must/see it again.
The larger portion of thestructural valley lies north of the
Markle Pass range of hills.
It is drained by a-rather-narrow-valley
tara-theeast-well Little Bitteroot River which escapes by a rather
narrow valley thru theeast wall of the structural depression not more
than five miles north of Markle Pass.
Glacial silt, with some very fine sand, covers a great area here,
extending from the north foot of the Markle Pass hills to Niarada, a
distance of I7 miles direct.
The surface of this alt plain is al
about 2775.
It ismuch dissected by shallow valleys.
the Little
Bitterroot has cut about 50 feet deep into it.
Ihis silt must be younger than the Merkle Pass moraine for it
covers the area occupied by ice when the moraine was built.
The
moraine, being the southernmost of all morainic topography here, mast
probably is correlative with that in Lynch Creek-Boyer Creek divide
and with the Mission Moraine at St. Ignatius.
See later note July 7
(Another bit of the Mrkle Pass moraine occupies the pass I-and
one and a fourth miles farther west, used by the road between Plains
and the Little Bitteroot Valley.
This pass, 3386 A.I., is about
I00 feet higher than Markle which measured 3276 A.T.
It contains
twd/ood-sized ponds almost on the summit and morainic forms anddebris
lie a thousand feet of so farther south than the pass itself.)
Traverse made from Niarada north to Glacier Park Hiway in search
of younger moraines than thate in Markle Pass.
Only scattered
glacial debris was seen in a few places, particularly on hills of
volcanic agglomerate north of Niarada (Sullivan Hill).
The Wiscon-
sin moraine isencountered abruptly at the Dude Ranch a quarter of a
miles south of' the Glacier Park Trail.
It ismot marked here but
about two or three miles west, it has a strong frontal slope, with a
great fosse between It and themountains to the south.
The map show
McGregor Lake in this fosse, and indeed, a long line of lakes and meadows
ews and marshes markd the, frontal drainage of the Wisconsin ice for
thirty miles or so.
This long marginal valley, or assemblage of
valleys, isdrained northward by Fisher River at the western end, south
ward by the big Thompson in its middle portion and southward by the
Little Bitterroot toward theleast.
The Little Bitterroot goes thru
a short, very marked gorge about two miles south of the Dude Rangh.
The road climbs considerably south of the Ranch to parallel the Impass
able (?) gorge.
Here is a clear case of Wisconsin derangement of
drainage,
the ponded waters in the marginal valley rising until they
overflated a pre-existing divide here.


16
No signs of a moraine found between the Dude Ranch and Markle Pass.
Lake Missoula shore lines up to the top of Sullivan Hill's highest
summit, north of Niarada, are as well marked or as indistinctly
marked) as thoseon It. Jumbo at Missoula.
Thisisfar from a check
bench mark but these shore lines very probably go as high as 3800
here (later reading, better checked from Flathead Lake, make the
highest 3730).
No shorelines were seen farther north, chiefly
because of theforest cover and because the small size of bays probably
v Sid not afford opportunity for more development ssouza got knova.
The Sullivan Hill
Looking east from the summit of Sullivan Hill, across the dissect-
Strue calls it
ed silt plain in the foreground, one bees a flat-bottomedtralley with-
out a stream, bounded by steep, mountainous walls, leading eastward
It is called Big Draw on the Forest Service
'Valley and Sullivan Gulch.
Which way it flowed is not yet clear.
A traverse of this valley east to Elmo on Flathead Lake shows a
surprising thing.
Thevalley floor, which looked so flat from the
hili summit and seemed so clearly to be a silt plain, is a valley
train of cobbles and boulders.
It leads dest from the big Elmo
moraine in section 22, descending34feet in 9 miles.
In section 26
of the next township west, two wells have been dug for 80 feet in the
gravel fill without penetrating thru it.
TheElmo moraine is a very impressive thing, seen from the west
and alsd from the summit.
Its western slope is very steep, its
crest being close to thelest edge.
Across its summmit, a little so
south of the middle of the valley, is a definite streamfout notch
produced by discharge for a time from the bay arm of the lake after the
ice had withdrawn from the moraine.
The floor of this channel has
several terraces and stream-cut bluffs, showing some lowering during
its occupancy.
than across the rock sill in the Polson moraine,
A Itltude here must be polittle sigher, Lorever
however, ÷l
else the
today would occupy the Big Draw.
The floor of the channel thru the moraine is marked by some deep
kettle holes, the deepest being IIQ feet below the adjacent terraces.
There must have been iceblocks buried here that did not melt until
after the discharge thru the notch ceased.
The most signifingt feature observed here, however, is the rela-
V tionship between Missoula shorelines and the moraine.
These shores
aze-as-definite--ag-anywhere-on-the-Big-Draw-stopesjustwestofthe
moraine and lower than the highe Drown bi pestne mornogne a 8180 defin-
definite as anywhere on the Big Draw slopes.
ite above the moraine at each end and actually can be seen well to the
east along the north side of Big Draw, two miles back along the northern
horn of the crescentic moraine but above the scarps of rock which
face the moraine.
But there are no shorelines on the moraine!
They can be traced
rigat-d4 right up against It, where they end.
Lake Missoula was
earlier than the Elmo moraine and there was no lake stage in Big Da w
after the Elmo moraine was built.


17
Elmo to Plains
July 7
I929
Re-exemination of the Imo moraine (which is like the Polson in
being composed lar ely of a very pebbly till, pebbles rounded) shows
the possibility of there being two very faint shorelines for a short
distance along itw western front.
But the numerous shoulders, some
of them close against the south side of the valley, are completely
innocent of shore line notching tho hardly a hundred feet away, the
hillside on which the moraine terminates has good shore lines.
The fossed on the north side of themlmo moraine looks from the
west like a drainage valley emerging toward Big Draw.
The floor of the trench thru the moraine descends with almost
no change in gradient out onto the valley train.
9 miles is 340 feet, or 38 // plus feet per mile.
Iota7 descent 10 o
the first mile is about 40 feet; this is all in the moraine.
latitude line.
The valley trafn gravel disappears where Big Braw crosses the 50*
ho the flat continues down Sullivan Gulch, no
gravel is in sight.
But it seems that it must be present , buried
under alluvial deposits of the reworked silt, for the valley thru the
silt continues and grows deeper, the gradient of the valley train does
not notably decrease at the place where the gravel disappears and the
valley train gravel is so charse at the lower end of its visible length.
Terraces of silt 25 feet high Loverook the lower end of the valley
train.
The valley train is younger therefore than the silt plain, younger
even than the diseection of the silt plain.
the moraine and the val-
lev train are of the same age.
Themoraine is younger than the shore
Are the shorelines and the silt of the same age?
V
lines the silt plain a mile or so north of Niorada is 2900 E26.
This
agrees with the silt plain west of Polson and is about the northern-
most of silt in this part of Montana.
Elmo moraine summit 3486 A.T.
All these altitudes
upper terrace
3346 A.T.
below 4200. No lake
trench floor
3306 A•T.
theredme wher Elmy
kettle hole in upper terrace
3236 A.T.
11
11
valley train head
3266 A.T.
V.T. wave built. The moraine summit therefore is 220 feet higher than the valley
• No Wisc. dam train head and 600 feet above l'lathead Lake.
these figures are
Missoula approximate only.
They may be forty feet off bût the relations
Just time.
among them are correct.
imarts
Shore lines of Lake Missoula on
?The nörthern end of the hill range between Camas Prairie and the
lower Ad part of the Little Bitterroot I beautifully aarked on
the morainic material tho the hard rock slopes do not carry the marks.
ally filled with moraine plastered against the mountain side.
The most interesting feature of the mountain sides here is the =
presence much lie She * get are alone 6 bad sons the gulated ton
Plains.
One of these was limbed in the hope of finding & morainic
depression back of its crest, similar to the depression back of the
summit of the one at Paradise.
This "delta" is 790 feet above the
Little Bitterroot.
Its face is scored with Lake Missoula shorelines
to the summit.
Back of it is a deep gulch developed since the
moraindic material vas deposited here.
But the gulch has only sli
slightly modified the original back slope which possesses good rem-
nants of two depressions.
Thetributaries now descending to the gulch
back of this bit of lateral moraine are headed to continue thru where
the moraine lies.
Instead, they turn abruptly andleave by way of
the guloh which is much more ravine-like than they are and not


18
one fifth as wide at the level of the lateral moraine ridge
as the older course now blocked by the moraine deposit.
V
Certainly this is a lateral moraine deposit, as are a dozen other
on this morth-facing group of hills.
Certainly there is ample reason
for accepting this explanation.
It seems highly probable that the
Perma-to-Plains features are genetically identical and that Davis
will be vindicated by the discovery of more efidence for glaciation
in Clark Fork valley about Thompson Falls in a few more days of field
work.
The moraine down the south slope of the Markle Pass hill range is
not the terminal.
There are excellent moraine hills and kettles
on the pass flea followed by the road up Big Gulch and over into
Camas Prairie from theeast.
The altitude here must be as high
as that at Markle Pass.
Below thispass, CAmas Prairie structural
valley has a fairly steeply sloping plain westward to the north/south
median line of the valley.
This plain is déversified by moraine
ridges and parallel sags of remarkable regularity.
The ensemble
looks, from the pass 300 feet or so higher, like gigantic ripplemarks
The ridges are from I0 to 20mfeet high above the separating sags and
are littered with erratic boulders
Some sags are wholly undrained,
others have portions that are closed depressions.
Most of the sags
have been used by running water and modified into stream furrows.
Glacial ice clearly reached as far south as Camas Prairie store,
six miles south of Markle Pass.
e ridges are much gentler hare,
however, and appear to die out to the southward.
There may have be
been no terminal moraine building habit for thelearly glaciation; witness
Mission Moraine and Lynch Creek moraine.
On the other hand, the
marked ridges and accumulations south of Markle Pass may be a later
moraine.
A later one is needed if the Post Creek (Nine Mile Rese
voir) moraine is to be established.
An hour later, traverse was made of the low hill barrier between
Camas Prairie and the Flathead, now trebbed by Camas Prairie Creek.
It is three miles or so across, 500 to 800 feet above the Flathead
and only a h hundred feet or so above the flat western part of Camas
Prairie.
The rock floor of
Camas reek has held up Camas Creek
from trenching back in the prairie.
Since the flat is a Pleistocene fill in a stuctural valley and its
arginage now just spills over a but slightly trenched sill, it is
interesting to consider the location of the preglacial discharge.
This could hardly have been the present route, yet it must have been
somewhere at the south end of the vally.
The traverse shows abundant glacial drift over the hills of this
In places it appears that a glacial till is beneath the
barrier.
surface.
Many clearly striated and bruised fragments occur.
Siyeh limestone, maroon aggillite, green argillite, red sacoharaoidal
quartzite; all these are characteristio of the drift in
cairie and the Little Bitterroot valby to thenorth.
Boulders several
feet in dianeter are present, as well as many smaller pieces.
Even
a morainio sag containigng a good -adzed pond, and several minor sags


were found.
This drift continues to within less than a mile of
Flathead river where bedrock becomes prominent.
Yet the drift may
continue clear over the tops of the bluffs facing the fiver.
They
were not examined sufficiently to be sure.
At any rate, the Camas
Prairie lobe came within less than a mile of the Flathead, much farther
V
south than was thought a few days ago.
Just north of Perma is one of the "delta" features which Pardee
first noted.
It Ties in a re-entrant in the face of the bluff, a
re-entrant which may be the junction of two minor rock-cut gullies.
The crest is near the frontal edge, 30I5 ft. A.T. and 460 feet above
Perma station.
It is an elongated oval in outline,
I200 feet long
and 600 feet wide, the length at right angles to the river valley.
Its summit area is entirely surrounded by lower surfaces, 25 feet
minimum and I00 feet maximum below the top area.
Two undrained
depressions back of it, the deepest (I00 ft. below the summit) having
a closed depression 60 feet deep.
The summit has a shallow saucer-
like depression.
The north end of the form is elongate like the
tail of a drumlin and the south end has a convex vertical profile
but a congave horizontal one.
Surrounding rock walls rise 50 to
I00 feet above the summit on the west, north and east.
This constructional form is composed dominantly of the local
slabby argillite but there are erratics of every kind found in Camas
Valley except Siyeh limestone.
There are no erosional forms of
any sort on the pile.
his isho more a delta than is the one back of Paradise round.
house.
There are, all told, 22 of these curious deposits im si
sight from the road along the south side of the Flathead between
Perma and Plains, and 6 on the south side.
There probably are m
more on the south side but the location of the road and the presence a
of a forest cover makes it impossible to see them all.
They lie at
all altitudes, they are of different magnitudes, theyvary in the char-
acter of their crest line as seen from below, some sloping down to the
east, some to thewest, some lowest in the middle, some highest there.
Because of trenching of some of these, it can be seen from below that
three of them that were not climbed once had depressions back of them.
The largest of açll lies in the mouth or on theeast side of the
mouth of Boyer Creek valley.
And Boyer Creek has numerous mounding
and terracings, modified by erosion, below the moraine limits noted
two days ago.
It seems now that Boyer\reek Valley has older mor-
aine in its lower three or four miles, in front of the moraine that
crosses the divide from Lynch Creek.
It seems clear that glacial
ice has entered the Flathead Valley here as it probably did at Ferma.
An a deane a are late van moraine, dev site mad % 0яаіса 2се
11 in Flatheadland alener down towar
spurs here and farther down toward Thompson Falls.
Davis is fight,
Pardee and Campbell are wrong .
Hanging valleys, remarkably well
show, are associated with the truncated spurs between plains and
Thompson Falls.
They are all relatively small affairs, any hang -
ing condition of larger ones hpparently having been destroyed by sub-
sequent stream work.
'These features of deltas", hanging valleys, scarped and trun-
cated spurs and ragged rock hills, partly out in the vailey at the
base of the truncated spurs continue a few miles below Thompson Falls.
A much wider structural valley is entered a-few-wile above Belknap
and from here almost to Noxon none if these features were seen.
This.
This part of the Clark Fork valley contains a high gravel terrace,
Comphell noting that in one place it is 320 feet above the river.
T+
seems to be a continuation of the high gravel terrace remnant east of
Thompson Tells the there axe the altitude above the advent about Ira
The river is in a deep trench in most places thru this terrace,


20
a trench either in gravel or in bedrock or in both.
this terrace continues dow the valley far below Hozon.
In some
places it carries & few feet of silt.
It seems to be replaced by
thick silt farther northwest.
But the genesis of the glavel flat
isnt at all clear.
The Thompson Falls debris fill seems clearly to be a moraine made
by a tongue of ice in Cork Fork valley.
Its easternmost member,
about two miles east of town, is nearly separate from that back of the
town and is essentially an elongate ridge about a mile long, standing
70 feet above a low tract between it and the cliffs and more than 400
feet above the river.
Its highest part is made of knobs of rock,
it carries no undrained depressions and no striated fragments were
found on it.
The only exposure showed very coarse, very poorly
assorted gravel, rather than till.
But it can only be a construction-
al form, and only a moraine, if onstructional.On its riverward lower
flank is some minor dune sand topography superposed on it.
Campbell speaks of a lobe of the Cordilleran ice up the Clark
Fork valley as far as Noxon being jgined by another tongue down thru
the Cabinets by way of Bull River.
He cites erratics 2000 feet
above the stream and glaciated surfaces of the bedrock.
None of this
was seen but scarped spurs and hanging valleys are present from Noxon
on downstream to attest the glaciated condition of this part of the
valley.
Yet Alden, last summer, said that neither Spokane nor Wisc
onsin ice moved more than a few miles up Clark Fork from Lake Pend
Oreille.
Was all of this tongue from Bull River?
If I were still looking for side-hill gashes, I surely would find
enough of them in these glaciated portions of Flathead and Clark Fork
valleys.
A phase of glacial undercutting of glacial oversteepening
seems to be the plucking of a gorge across a spur and the leaving of
portions of the spur as ragged buttes.
One particularly marked feature
of this kind is along the highway a few miles south of Clark Fk. village.
Outlet of Glacial Lake Missoula
July 9 I929
All day was spent on the divide along the entire western wall
of Johnson Creek in the vicinity of the spillway which (Pardee and?)
Davis point (s) out as the probably high-level outlet of Lake Missoula.
Aneroid error at the start was about 50 feet.
On return, the
error was I5 feet.
The day was fair and it seems probable that no
great changes took place between morning and evening.
Trusting. the aneroid, there is no 4200 foot notchlalong this
divide between Johnson and Granite creeks.
The lowest notch
found read 4800 on the dial and the one mapped as 4200 read 8000. No
Obviously the mapping was done with very little traverse work.
blame can be attached for the mountains here are very steep and the
vegetation very difficult to get thru when off a brushed-out trail.
There is no sign whatever in any of the four or five saddles
examined of a glacial river having ever used them.
All are rounded
ridge summits and no more.
No bare rock, no cliffs bounding them,
no terracing in them, no boulders, no deltaio accumulations or channel
forms dovm the hillside to the west.
Lake Missoula never discharged across these mountains.
[the northernmost Lake Missoula shorelines seen in this study are
on the enst side of the valley at Cabinet)
The highest foreign material seen in Johnson Creek valley was a
lorge rounded granite boulder at about 3550 aneroid.


21
Sand Point to Rockford
July I0
I929
A gravel pit two miles west of Sand Point along the Newport
duty eigne exoollont delta struaturo, with foresets diping most and
southwest, and with three feet of topsets on them.
is in a hint that is semi-isolated now, thedelta being at theextreme
south tip.
Looks as tho there had been mach erosion here since
delta-building, , or that the delta was built directly from theedge of
the ice.
The lake surface then was probably held up by the moraine
at Albany. Dalta top not measured but at least 50 to 75 feet above the
present lake level.
Bayview, on the south end of Lake Pend Oreille, is shut in on the
drift plain side by a steep descent in till or gravel.
Looks like
an ice contact slope.
The ice apparently built up a great waste
fill in ffont of it.
There is little more in the way of moraine ÷÷
ridging south of Bayview than south of Granite.
One passes from
P altitude of the outwash plain east of Athol is 2400.
thasing ins to the outwash almost without any descent Talong the
The general
east side, adjacent to the mountains, is a gravel terrace 90 feet
V
higher.
A gravel pit shows fully 8 feet of dark stained gravel
above the bright material.
It is not decayed nor strongly red in
color but is distinct y dark reddish brown for that depth.
There
is no dust cover on it, at least near the edge of the terrace where
the pit is located.
This gravel should be Spokane in age.
A prominent bench of Columbia River basalt east of Ramsev lies
against the mountains of deformed sedimentaries, and its basalt uncon-
formably overlies the argillite, with a weathered zone ofprebasalt
mantle rock between.
Top of the bench is 270 feet above the base
and carries faint morainic topography and plenty of erratic boulders.
This should be Spokanetill.
Thesame kind of momainic expression and abundant erratic boulder
distribution is to be found over the southern extension of this basalt
bench, west of the north end of Hayden Lake.
It seems to descend
gradually and to blend into thegravel plain which dams the lake.
This must be seen again and if it is Spokane gravel which makes all
these lakes along Rathdrum Prairie, the fact must be clearly established.
The spur of the Mica Peak group of mountains which lies between
Spokane River and Cougar Creek clearly has glacial erratics on it and
seems to have faint morainic ridges and hollows among the small rock #
hills of its northern slope, up to 2500 at least.
Anderson insists
that Spokane ice was up here.
If so, it had to melt back considerably
before the great flood of glacial waters arrived, for there are no
adequate glacial waterways, if any at all, along this slope.
The divide at 28I0 cossed sputhward.
In Cougar Creek, just
below the road crossing of the divide, , are dozens of erratic boulders
cobbles andpebbles, several of them striated beautifurly- very definite-
V
1 errationd"a coulders if thefranodiorite poppy and hare.
The high-
altitude checked from the 2810 pass.
There are
but few of them farther down the valley.
Along Temporary 95 hiway, which leads southward thru Mica and near
Bellgrove, another large collection of foreign boulders, cobbles and
pebbles occurs at a little less than 2500 on the sauth slope of Cougar
Creek valley.
The Mica upland, which is a bench of Columbia River
Basalt, carries numbers of such boulders.
they were found
Bag to Ang the roma beyond ino mouth edge of the satan ace , una of
which along the highway is below 2600.
"Several places seen along this hiway where old stained quartzite
gravel is aliding dov the face of the road outs.
This gravel must
predate the erosion of Couer DAlene valley.


22
Jess than a mile above Rockford, along a tributary of Rock
Creek, probably Mica Creek, are several foreign boulders and cobb-
les, one cobble definitely striated.
The soil where they occur
backwaters.
is a pebbly silty altitude here 1s 2106;
identical with the pebbly silt of all scabland
Do the pebbly silts occur in doeur DAlene Lake valley, along
with the erratic boulders?
see July 20 p. 34
Rockford has a U.s.G.s. bench mark near the station.
It is
2376
muck
Mica to Post Falls
July II I929
The valley of California Creek at and above Mica was examnned
for glacial silts but none can be identified.
There is too much
arkosic debris from the granite hills to make it possible, apparent-
ly, to use the variety of pebbles criterion.
Essentially no
basalt farther north makes it unlikely that the feature of tiny
basalt particles could be present.
None were seen, at any rate.
No stratification in the superficial mantle rock.
The eastern of the two passes across the higher ridge two miles t
or two and a half miles north of Mica contains a deltaic or fanlike
gravel deposit a little below and south of the summit.
Dipping
beds descend southward.
Gravel is almost wholly of granitic debris
very poorly worn and poorly sorted.
Large boulders of kaolinized
and crumbling granite, even boulders of residua clay, occur in the
gravel.
A few foreign rock fragments present, therr outlines and S
their hard exteriors in contrast with the angularity and cruhbling
condition of theLocal material.
Altitude of the pass is 2400.
Its floor, a little north of the pit, bears a number of mounds,
to 30 feet high, that are elongate with the pass and have a few
I0
closed depressionslamong them.
Either morainic or bar accumulations.
The mouth of thecreek valley down the north slope from this pass
is closed by a broad barrier of gravel 60 feet above the marshy flat.
The altitude of the flat is 2040.
The barrier is marked by three
great broad low ridges, the relief between sags and ridges being
about 50 feet.
This barrier of gravel is all of three miles wide.
Its northern slope is about I00 feet high above a gravel flat into
which the river has trenched about 40 feet.
The northern slope is
steeper than any other slopes in the great gravel compound ridge and
is strewn with thousands of boulders, many of them four feet in max.
diameter, almost all of them larger than elsewhere in the deposit.
This northern slope looks as tho a great stream had eroded it, as
tho it were not an original constructional slope.
It may be #katos
thought of as the descent from the Spokane gravel to the Wisconsin
valley train.
This idea involves several consequences that will
be outlined shortly.
The mouth of Saltese C.eek valley is partially blocked in a
similar fashion, the drainage escaping far over to the west side of
the valky, hard against the rocky ppoint projecting out into Spokane
Vall y•
In each case, the highest of the barrier is to the east.
Liberty Lake valley is also similarly blocked, the surface of the
barrier being 2I50, at least I00 feet above present surface of the lak
This barrier, like theothers, slopes rather steeply down to theenclosed
or partially enclosed basin in the trib. valley mouth.
It is alee
diversified by very broad, gently slopanged, ridges on its summit,
ridges that con only be contrustional.
The summit is II0 feet
above what is here called the Wisconsin valley train, the wide flat
of gravel along the river.


n. /
23
Above Spokane Bridge, the river is close to the rock slopes
along the south side of Spokane Valley• The broad flat in the
middle of the valley continues northeastward, when traced upgrade,
across Rathdrum Prairie.
Its course at Rathdrum is far over to the
north side of the Spokane Valley.
Approaching Post Falls from the west, the pronounced scarp in
gravel (50 ft. high) which puzzled me several years ago, is encounterd.
This steep, west-facing scarp is composed of wellywashed river gravel,
stained to a depth of 8 feet.
, tho not decomposed.
Two apparently
correlative terrace-like features can be seen to the north and north-
west, against the north elope of Spokane Valley.
The summit of this
scary isnearly flat for at least a mile to theeast, probably for ser
several miles.
It has very gentle undulations in it, a little
more pronounced in the gentle southward descent to Post Falls, there
being no scarp to the south as there is to the west.
The hypothesis above suggested; that these broad undulating rigges
of gravel are Spokane in age, is going to require much less in the way
of Wisconsin water.
It is also going to require an ice-free Spokane
Valley for a very great Spokane glacial river.
If bursting of
the damp of glacial Lake Missoula caused the scabland flood, theice
margin must have retreated from Spokane Valley, from theSpangle lobe,
and probably from much of the lower Spokane Valley below the city and
from the Columbia Valley along the north side of the scablands as far
west as Grand Coulee.
This seems a feasible way to get water
from Lake Missoula to enter all channel heads as far west as Grand
Coulee.
There is no field evidence against it.
Indeed, there ÷
is a lack of field evidence f6r the view that the ice was at its
southern limit when the flood occurred.
If the ice had stood at its
farthest extent at that time, I- Lake Coeur D'Alene should have then
overflowed to the southwest,
2- stream notches should have been cut a
along the south slope of Spokane Valley (if the ice was then against
the base of this slope), and 3- Mica Channel should have been the
aominant channel, if not the only channel, for scabland waters.
The bar forms with a relief of I00 feet would thus be simply expl-
ained.
But if these bars were made by the water that flowed thru scabland
channels the water over the bars must have been enormously deep.
The bar tops are 2I00 to 2I50 and the highest berg-drifted erratics
at Mt. Hope are 2550.
400 feet of water flowing vigorously enough
to make these bar forms with large gobbles and even bout ere h them,
and nearly four miles wide at Post Falls, is a conception,
scabland flood was originally.
Can it be supported?
Where are
the water marks along these rocky slopes 300 to 400 feet above the
bar tops?
But if theater which was deep enough to make thebars (I00 ft.
minimum) did not escape across the scablands, it must have gone down +
the Spokane to theColumbia.
And if it did this, there should be
bar forms I00 feet or so above theisconsin valley train along it.
Are there?
There is no third alternative!
Butperhaps these are not bars!
They certainly are not eros-
fong1 forms and if not bars, they must be gravel-covered moraines.
Are they?


24
Seven or eight large cobbles of the granodiorite porphyry
found in a quarter of a mile of roadside cobbles on top of the bar
two miles west of Post Falls,ur Signal Point
Post Falls to Athol
July II
The large bar-like
I929
gravel form north of Post Falls is composed
at its southern end, next to the river, of fine gravel from bottom to
top, about 50 feet.
Bedding is very poorly exposed but is horizon-
tal where shown except in one place.
Here it is foreset, dip being
eastward in the plane of thesection.
Some large boulders have come
out of it and many cobbles but it is a remarkably uniform fine gravel
in general.
The summit of this bar-like form is nearly I00 feet above Post
Falls (2265 A•T.) but since the town is down in a more recent valley,
the really significant height is that of the western scarp, 50 feet ens
above the plain to thelest.
The northwestern slope of the gravel
deposit isless marked but still a conspicuous slope.
It is littered
with boulders, one at least 8 ft meximum length seen.
This to ulder-
strewn slope apparently continued hally across the Spokane Valley, not
far from the 2200 contour, tho more directly.
A mile or so south of
Rathdrum, it is about 60 feet high and its top is nearly I00 feet above
Rathdrum.
At RAthdrum/ is a channel half a mile wide, the floor of the
Wisconsin glacial river from the moraine at the south end of Pend Oreille
Lake.
This channel, now carrying no stream, is thelowest feature
of the great gravel fill of Spokane Valley.
It istery marked a
mile and a half south of Hauser where its higher bluff, on the south,
was read as IIO feet high.
The floor here is strew with boulders,
some of them in bars.
Spokane River apparently enters this channel at or a mile or so
below the hiway bridge called the Spokane Bridge on the topog, map.
A very interesting and important bit of topography is a broad
hill two miles east of
Post Falls and just north of the hiway and NPR
It has a steep scarp I70 feet high, facing toward the west at the
prow-like terminus.
No sections in thehill were seen but none are
needed.
The summit is well marked moraine topography, with very
good kettles and hills whose immediate local relief is 50 ft.
Traced
eastward, the high surface (which looks plane from a few miles away)
descends more gently to thegeneral surface of the southern part of
Rathdrum Praitre.
This also is morainic.
Indeed, , weak morainic
sag and swell topography characterizes the prairie for two or three
miles to the north, very gradually blending into what is probably the
outwash plain surface correlative with the moraine.
This in turn
breaks off ofer the 60-foot scarp to the low channel just south of
Rathdrum.
By this correlation, the big broad gravel mound north
of Post Falls isthqwestern continuation of theoutwash of this moraine.
But this isht correct in some way for the big gravel mound north
of Post falls abuts against the steep west face of the moraine and thi
steep hikgsh high face is very probably an erosional scarp.
Spokane
River on the south and an empty channel on the north lie at or close t
to the scerp bases and join at the west end.
The moraine summit reabhes 2400 aneroid set at Post Falls half an
hour eerlier.
The USGS maps rings itwith 2300 and has the 2200
around the base of the high soarp so it may well reach almost to 2400
on the map•


28
What bearing does this fragment of moraine, and the lower
moraine to the east and north, have on the hypothests that the gravel
mounds north of Post Falls, at the mouth of Liberty Lake valley, etc.,
are bars in a great glacial river that spilled over to the scablands?
It seems to debar the hypothesis, for all this moraine must have been
overrun by a river which stranded erratics up to 2550 and whose
channel floors at the heads of the scabland routes are nowhere
lower than 2450.
The scabland rivers either took origin from a lake-like river in
Spokane Valley(if that valley was ice-free when the flood occurred) or
these big bars and the moraine are younger than the scabland.
This
point must be cleared up.
Several new and very interesting finds in the vicinity of Lone
Both Fish Twin and Spirit lakes are dammed by moraine.
The moraine-marked area extends from the west base of Lone Mountain
to the shore of Fish Lake which is I00 feet lower.
It is shown by
the contours on the Rathdrum sheet.
Around the northern end of the
Mountain, is a broad shallow channel, part of it with well-defined
channel walls.
This channel comes off the main prairie south of
Athol and swings around between Lone Mountains and thehigh mountains =
west of the big valley to include the lower part of Fish Lake andto
re-enter the main prairie flat near Sheridan.
North of this channel ismoraine on the valley floor from the lower
end of Spirit Lake eastward to within two miles of Athol.
It istery
well expressed, a great series of nearly north south elongated ridges
and sags with a maximum observed relief of 80 feet.
The moraame
is very gravelly.
Its material isstained to a depth of at least
6 feet but there are no marks of running water on it and little evi-
dence of filling of thekettles.
Most of the slopes are steep.
Extraordinarily large boulders of granite lie on the moraine, some of
them 20 feet or more long.
The highest part of this wide moraine belt (five miles max.) is
above 2600, a11 of it lies above 2500 which marks the northern margin
of the channel around behind Lone Mountain.
In vigor ofexpression, , this moraine should be Wisconsin in age.
It grades out edstward into oytwash, , also above 2500, to within less
than 7/ a mile of Athol.
here it breaks off abruptly in a scarp
I60 feet high, , the scarp overlooking themadaeablt the undoubted Wiscon-
sin valley train at Athol.
The moraine therefore must be pre-Wisconsin in age.
The Athol
plain istraceable two miles farther north right into the Wisconsin
moraine which 1dconsiderably less vigorously expressed.
The scarp
records more than 200 feet of erosion thru the middle of the valley,
removing therest of the outwash plain, (if it is such) which accompanied
the spirit Lake moraine.
Relations are similar to those two miles
east of Post Falls.
The Post Falls moraine is 2400 (or nearly so);
the spirit Loke moraine is 2500 to 2600 and I6 mibes farther north.
It doesnt seem correct to correlate the two, for any lobe of Cordilleran
ice reeching to Post Falls would have its moraine much higher at
Spirit Lake.
Yet there is no evidence that they are of adfferent are
ages, and the upper limit of drift deposited here(Spirit Lake) when
the Post Ills more ne was made may well be hidden in the forest on
the mountain slopes and these ridges on the plain may be retreatal,
recessional.
It seems more probable that the outwash north of the low morainio
ares east and north of Post Malle moraine Isyounger than the moraine,
rather than contemporaneous.
The field relations can be better
understood by this view.
Ls


Athol. to Post Falls
July II I929
Benches of|gravel block minor valleys in several places along
thehorthwest side of the big valley near Rathdrum.
Two very pro-
nounced ones two andthree miles southwest of the town.
One is near
ly 2400 feet AT on its high valley-ward edge, 225 feet abovethe £100r
of theWisconsin channel at its base.
It has allow bench against its
lower slopes 30 feet above the channel floor.
About a section of
land lies back of and no higher than this bench edge.
Half offit is
25 feet or so lower and is marshy and without an outlet stream, tho
a. creek flows into it.
The material, so far as exposed in road cuts
and a gravel pit on the front of the scary, is fine, , well-stratified,
well»sorted river gravel, horizontally bedded.
A similar Feature Occurs a mile farther down the valley, and the
high benck can be identified at several places as far west as
(Sucker) Lake whose valley mouth ispartially constricted by a spur at
thisterrace level on the west side
Yet Hauser Lake and Newman
Lake to therest of it) is low andif these valleys ever were filled by
the bench gravel deposit, they were eroded clean at the time the great
high gravel fill recorded bythese benches was eroded out of the main
valley.
The upper limit of these benches apparently descends somewhat
down the valley tho no figures were recorded to prove this.
The
benches should belong with the Post Falls moraine.
If they do,
there has been were much more erosion of the high bar gravel on the
north side of Spokane Valley than on the south.
It may be that the
big bars on the south are younger; itmay be that only lateral erosion
by the river iskesponsible for the fragmentary character of the deposit
here.
The gravel is at least I25 feet higher on thenorth than in #
the big bar north of Post Falls.
A splendid sharp-cut notch in a spur about two miles north of
Rathdrum.
A side-hill gash!
Not all of thebench-like forms seen along Spokane Valley are of
drift or alluvial debris.
One prominent one a mile southwest of Post
Falls, 450 feet above the river, turns out to be simply a rock bench,
littered with local debris andyielding only one undoubted foreigh sea
scratched fragment.
Whitebird and Pittsburg Landing
July I3 I929
There is not a trace in either Salmon orSnake River valleys at
these places of glacial water.
Every form isnormal, all materials
are close to their source, no striae on any fragments.
Apparently
these long distances up and along crooked canyons deprived the back au
rush of its berg load and its ability to rearrange local debris.
Disappointing as it is to fail to get the record this close to th
flood's upper limit, It is very significant that the peguliar deposits
about and below Lewiston are absent in theSalmon and thesnake.
This
contrast indicates the operation of radically different conditions.
Debris accumulations in Snake River valley at Pittsburg Landing
are almost wholly steep alluvial fans of corse material.
Sections
in theorge fan at Pittsburg Landing show locally derived, subangular
meterial thruout.
Even in the cliff at the tip of the fan, there is
mamost no vell-worn material. & todinakes the sandient our ene fan 8
Granite boulders four ft.
in diameter are common in the deposit.
too steep to drive up in high.
The fan is compound in that its growth has enclosed some low hills
of rock and different parts of the fan have different characters and


27
V
altitudes.
There are several flat places in the lower part that may
represent Snake River planation.
Granodiorite boulders in Snake River Drainage.
Cobble bars of the Clearwater, the Salmon and the Snake were inspec-
ted in several places (the Snake only at Pittsburg Landing).
Many
and varied porphyries seen, especially in the Snake.
Many of the
right color andtexture but mineralogically wrong.
Only onelcobble
was found anywhere that might have been selected as a grandiorite
porphyry of the type I have been collecting.
So many others that
are similar in a general way that it seems that a graded series might
readily be made.
This iskuite different, as I remember it, from the
porphyries in the high drift about and below Lewiston and it suggests
strongly that they never came down any of these valleys.
Furthermore,
there are no angular forms of these porphyries, either in the bars
or high on the slopes, while thehigh-level drift porphyries are all
angular.
Anderson showed me a series ofspecimens of grandiorite, collected
from dikes along the northeast wall of Pend Oreille Lake, near Hope.
One was exactly thetype I have been collecting from the berg-borne
erratics and thehigh bars of Spokane Valley, the others were very close
variants.
The Pend Oreille valley seems to be a logical source.
'Grangeville to Nez Perce•
Between these two places, the plateau ishairly plane and its local
drainage pattern isvery immature.
One deep canyon and a few short
tribs. lies between the two towns, draining to the Clearwater.
ALs
there islessentially no loess on this part of the plateau. Stus annelina
But north of Nez Perce to Orofino, theplateau has a good loess
mantle, a few tens of feet thick on thepverage and a good maturely
developed local drainage pattern.
It seems that, like the Anatone
region, the absence of loess however that may be explained) means the
absence of mature topography.
Kamiah Buttes-described
1 by Anderso (1930)
Clearwater River Valley
July I5 I929
Between Agatha and Myrtle, at altitudes between I050 and I300,
there are numerous fragments of non-basalt on the grassy slopes of the
basalt hillside .
Scratched fragments were found up to I250, quite
definitely glacial.
One quartzite cobble had both striae and chatter
marks on both sides, oriented with thelength of the cobble.
Large
granite boulders at I000.
Most of thecobble-sized pieces are angular
Or subangular, many of thepebbles are rounded, some broken-round.
Schist ispresent in the large variety of rocks represented and argillite
and phylite of typical Beltian fates and colors; maroon, red, green,
are fairly numerous.
The rounded condition of many pebbles suggests that perhaps an
old river gravel lies here also, and that only the angular and suban-
gular pieces should be considered as glacial.
All foreign material
is fresh in appearance.
(Nearly all)
Above Agatha, along the road, is a soil three or four feet thick,
unstratified, containing non-basalt fragments, three pleces of which
are striated.
One rounded basalt cobble, found act about 950 or
975, is definitely striated with short, wide scratches elongated with
the cobble.
But these marks are on a definitely concave surface
whatever their origin, they can hardly be gLacial.
They are
and,
aistinctly different from the striae on stones in glacial drift.
In the mouth of thecreek valley dust to the west of the rounded
spur which carries striated stones up to I250 is a remnant of a silt


28
deposit/about 30% or 40 feet above the river, a silt which isdark 7
brownish like the residual soil of thebasalt and is unstratified
but which contains angular fragments of non-basalty, two of which
are striated and bruised.
This seems clearly to be a part of the
sought-for glacial silt up theclearwater.
The creek is about half
a mile east of Firbluff station.
A mile east of Arrow along the highway, at an altitude of I050
A.T., 230 feet above the river, is the glacial silt without doubt.
It is about 8 feet thick and islimited to one exposure,
on both sides%.
undulations.
It is bedded, tho irregularly and with marked
The coarse sand seems to be largely basaltic. Some
of the silt iswell impregnated with bits of rock.
Silt color and-
is pale yellowish, not the deeper, darker color of basaltic soil.
It ale ismuch looses, like loess, while theldarker material in the
mouth of the creek valley is a bit cloddy, as tho more colloidal in
character.
Above Agatha, there is no road along the Clearwater valley bottom
as far as Ahsahka.
From Ahsahka, one can traverse the valley floor
to Greer Where another interruption in valley bottom road exists as
far as Kamiah.
From Kamiah, , the valley floor can be traversed by
car as far as Harpster.
Ail theralley that could be reached by
car was traversed.
Theme result was that nowhere were glacial
silts seen, nowhere were striated erratics found, nowhere were valley
mouth bars discovered.
Tho most of the traversed portion isbelow
the I325 foot upper limit of the flood, any conspicuous record left he
here is now obscured by forest, covered by grass or eroded away.
Perhaps one should not expect that these long valleys should carry th
flood record at its crest level.
A surface gradient is an essential
factor and that could not exist in adequate amount as the water approa-
ched the upper level.
Tammany Hollow
July I5 I929
The Hollow is a broad structural depression in the Lewiston plat-
eau, about southeast of the city, at the head of the creek.
Its floor
is somewhat above I300.
Westward, it opens thru the creek valley;
itself partly structural, to the Snake.
TheLatah formation is wad- opened on the north wall in the west-
ern part of the Hollow.
It islargely white quartz sand and white
quartzite pebbles.
It is not a gravel; the pebbles are scattered or
in thin layers only.
Associated non-quartzite pebbles are thoroly
decayed.
No basalt found; a curious thing.
This Miocene stream
deposit hastery well rounded pebbles; of 3I5 specimens, I5 were
broken rounds.
No cobbles or boulders in the deposit.
Glacia ly transported erratic boulders of a variety of kinds in
the creek gravel at I200 and thence dowstream.
Not abundant.
One
angular granite along the road.
The glacial silt iswell exposed in a cut along the old RR grade a
little west of the foot of the Olive Olson grade.
It is I2 to I5
feet thick and is covered by two or three feet of dust, with columnar
jointing.
The silt isstratified, layers of very clean fine sand or
silt alternating with layers of dominantly coarse bahak sand and of the
silt densely charged with grains of black basalt and foreigh particles
The sliver and splinter shapes are pronounced.
In density of the cha
cherging of black particles, this silt is unexcelled even by the
Johnson Creek silt of the Walla Walla plain.
The stratification is
irregular and the strate are discontinuous, just like the stratifica.
tion pheses of theglacial silt everywhere.
Altitude of the deposit
not secured but certainly higher than the top of the Tammany Hollow


29
bar at the valley mouth.
The bar re-examined; new observations made and some changes in
interpretation.
Most of the bulk of the bar is made of fine gravel
and most of the larger pebbles, thebobbles and boulders are irregular-
ly interspersed thru thefine gravel.
Even where tlee boulders and 00
cobbles are most abundant, they are well separated from each other by
the fine gravel.
It is in no sense a boulder of cobble bar, theinte
v interstices of which are filled with fine gravel.
It israther a
plum pudding texture.
With this arrangement, some of the genetic condtions may be de-
fined.
First-- the dominant fine material does not indidate sort-
ing, it indicates only that here most of the stream debris was fine
'and angular.
Second-- current sweeping along the Snake and eddy-
ing back partly into the mouth of Tammany was moving boulders three
and four and even five feet in maximum diameter along the margin of
the channel/and yet not sweeping away the fine angular gravel on which
and in which the boulders rest.
Third-- theextreme angularity of the
fine gravel is the consequence of fracturing of already rounded gravel,
Not alone do the numerous broken-rounds attest this byt there are
features of the cobbles and boulders, which were previously overlooked
that are very surprising, yet perfectly in harmony with the brokend-
round pebbles.
The boulders and cobbles are very commonly marked 3
by percussion scars or shells.
These scars are on the edges of
flattish forms.
Many do not have them, many have but one such scar
but some are fearfully pounded almost all around theedge.
These ma
marks can be duplicated almost perfectly by sharp hammer blows on the
edge or by throwing the cobble forcibly against another.
There is
no possible doubt of their origin; they have me from pounding and be
battering of the cobbles and boulders on each other.
The size
of some of the shells is almost unbelievable.
A
common size is two
or three inches across but many exceed this greatly.
The largest seen
was in a basalt boulder and measured I5 inches across at right angles
to the direction from which the bRow came.
It is a shallow shell, no
more than an inch deep.
Do these proportions indicate anything abo
about the character of the blow?
The entire face of the cut along the back side of the bar contains
these battered cobbles and the broken round pebbles.
Despite its a
difference in color and its north-dipping fo resets, it is all one
deposit.
Its continuation north of the creek can be traced readily.
Another feature of this bar, not previously grasped, is the 20-£t
deposit of yellow brow silt above the gravel toward the north end of
the bar.
The silt rests directly on the rough bouldery surface of
the gravel deposit, some boulders a foot or two in diameter, setting up
on top of the gravel ,project for their full diameter into the silt.
The silt is well sorted, no scattered particles of basalt, etc.,
showing in it.
It also iswell stratified, with very definite but +
rather irregular bedding.
Lenses of black coarse sand occur irregular-
ly, the contact of sand on silt being so irregular that it seems like a
cross section of miniature mountain topography.
To add to the r
puzzle, clastic dikes can be traced up in the deposit, thickening with
increasing height and some of them abruptly ending at various levels.
This silt looks more like a normal stream alluvium, the cracks develop-
ing at successive intervals while the accumulation was going on per
shitum, thus some of the cracks being filled and covered over before
other cracks were formed.
The dikes are composed ofblack basalt sand
like the lenses.
Yet there is no such sandon top of the silt today
from which the major number of the cracks (coming to the top) could be
filled.
Such sand deposit may once have been present, and now gone
by erosion.


30
fayand large.
Among the large boulders in the deposit, basalt dominates by
Much of what was earlier called decayed basalt
may be decayed hydrated phases of the basalt.
One boulder 3 feet 70
long, of loegg, sufficiently indurated to need a hammer to break it
up. but Xox marked thruout by rootlet marks, lies associated with
boulders of equal size but composed of basalt.
Brevity of action
is absolutely required for this boulder to occur in this deposit.
The peroussion marks of ordinary rodled cobbles are rarely found
on the cobbles of this bar.
rhaps they were not looked for care-
fully enough.
The smooth worn side of these cobbles certainly should
have them as records of their experiences befove the battering episode
occurred.
But the blows struck during this episode seem to have
yielded complete fractures, rather than incipient ones
The source
of the blows surely was other cobbled and boulder material .
The
cause of the blows was current action.
If thecobbles were rolled,
how rapidly would they have to move to praduce such percussion?
As rapidly as in a cascade or rapid, certainly.
Do smoothed cobble
going thru a papids, suffer such percussion chipping?
If not in
a rapids, then there must have been bodily lifting anddropping of the
cobbles and boulders.
down stream.
And no rapids are available, either up or
Lewiston andflarkston terraces.
July I6 I929
Cobbles are plentiful in the gravel bluff just south of the
business district of Lewiston but they are not battered with percus-
sion flake scars.
The gravel is well sorted in foreset strata of
uniform character.
There are no huge boulders in a matrix of fine
gravel as in Tammany Bar's foresets or horizontal strata.
There
are no diversely stratified beds, truncating those below and dipping
at various angles as in the Clarkston gravel.
There are no inter-
calated silt beds.
My former interpretation still seems best;
that the delta-bedded Lewiston gravel isolder than the glacial flood-
inge
tho the percent of broken rounds in it is very high.
If they
were all freshly broken rounds, as in Tammany, it would be difficult
to call them older.
The Nave pit re-exammned.
Plenty of upstream foresets here and
in the river bluff for a quarter of a mile to the north.
The cobble
rejects contain a number with percussion flake scars, some with several.
But there isnt the abundance of these shapes here as there is at Tam-
many•
Nor are there so many broken rounds in the smaller pebbles,
Angularity, however, is the dominant character of the fine gravel.
silt up the Lewiston grade to about I000.
At I500, materialwas
which looked like silt from the moving car, proved to be loess.
Thorn Creek Valley
July I6 I929
silt with plenty ofparticles of granite, quartite,
dent along the road three miles dov Thorn Creek from Thornton.
, etc., is abun-
occurs very close to 2250 A.T.
#* In it are several cobbles and sm
gre11 boulders of non-basalt and one piece of the grandiorite por-
phyry.
This find supplies a need, for Thorn Creek by the flood
hypothesis, should have these silts somewhere above 2I70, the upper-
nost limit dong thehead of Rook Greek.


31
Cache Creek Valley
July I6
I929
Silts farthest up Cache Creek were found in the tributary enter-
ing from the south, half a mile above the junction of the two volleys.
The silts are only faintly distinguished from the loess for the content
of tiny pebbles and coarse grains is very low.
Four non-babalt
2285
pebbles were found, one a granite.
Altitude by aneroid was 2765, AT.
Malden reading 2665 aneroid.
tude is scoured. malde 2085 - Cm+SHP miles:
Correct this for A.T. when Malden alti-
Two miles south of Malden a diagonal road crosses Cache Creek
valley, leading to Rosalia.
Up the east slope of the valley along
this road, the glacial silt isfery conspicuous in, 6 foot cuts up to
2700 aneroid, +220 Q.T. At and above 27I0 aneroid (2 2 30 4. T.), nothing
but loess was found in the road cuts.
Numerous pebbles and cobbles
of various non-basalts occur in the lower cuts.
This silt's upper
limit is I35 feet above Malden Station
(2 ~ 0 a.T. and somewhat more
than that above the valley floor.
Nothing but a glacial river I35
feet deep will provide thereat turbulence to put this debris two
miles back in a tributary valley at this altitude.
In every way,
*
this find fixts into the demands fof the flood hypothesis and in every
way, it isimpossible to explain by any other hypotheses yet proposed.
The glacial river overflowed the rock hill just south of Malden,
leaving a small loessial island where the Malden water tower stands but
stripping off all the Palouse soil down the south slope into the mouth
of Cache Creek and building a bar there which encloses an undrained
depression.
22-20 a.T.
Squaw Creek
July I6
I929
No silts were found in thes valley but a number of erratics up
to 2700 aneroid (Malden 2565 aneroid).
One slab of Belt argillite,
a small boulder of the granodiorite porphyry and a striated quartzite,
cobble.
WaverlY.
July I6 I929
Theflatbn which theillage stands carries the glacial silt at
2380 A.T.
This is the first find of this pebbly silt in Latah Cr.
valley and is very welcome.
It shows that the same aberrant condi-
tions of unbelievably muddy water existed in this socalled glacial la
lake wet up toward the head, as it did in every other back-water pond÷
ing of the flood,
This was no slack-water lake.
How deep was
the water in'the outlet channel across thedivide?
Cant this be det-
ermined by examination of/small tributary valleys, reached by road and
reading from Spangle?
Spokane to Mt. Hope to Spangle
July I8
I929
Somenew conceptions this afternoon that promise to help in corre-
leting theglacial history of the Spokane Valley and the scabiand
channel heads.
The valley of Latah Creek is theconnecting link and
has never seemed to have characters of either.
The drajnage of Latak
flows northward, toward any invading Cordilleran ice.
THere never
was eng glacial water flowing down this valley, tho theralley contains
valley,-and-wath-out1g*-only-lapu-tRe-Greek-elannely-whese-fleer-46
betweeR-3499-Rad-3450 flowing southward seemed possibde, up the gradient
of the valley and th outlet only thru Pine Creek channel, whose floor
is between 2400 and 2450, 500 to 600 feet higher than the lowest of


37
these stream-laid deposits.
Yet stream waters are largely respon-
sible for the stratified materialsin Lath Valley.
Beginngng with the high bank of gravel along the NPR on the
east, side of Latah Valley, these stratified depositt,
traced south-
ward, become more and more sandy toward Duncan and beyond Duncan are
stratified silts.
Not complete sections of all valley walls
could be made of course, but for what wasseen, the/generalization is
good.
And nothing was seen do indicate that there was more than
one episode of deposition of this gravel, sand and silt.
The gravel in the cliff along the NPR ogst of Latah Creek has been
described in a peevious season's notes.
Itsupper surface is not a
flat terrace top but idundulatory.
It islargely built over radio a
by a residential section of the city and isdifficult now to interpret,
but this surface seems to be the product of later dissection.
The
altitude of the highest is/about 2370, whence it/escends to 1900,
theez
creek valley bottom.
'Foresets in this gravel and inbther gravel
and sand of glacial origin farther south indicates southward flow of
the depositing water.
It now seems probable that the gravel in Latah Valley in Spokane
grades into the thick sand deposits five miles or more south of the ba
businessdistrict and these into the silts (with striated and bruised
erratic pebbles) about Duncan and as far south as the road crossing of
Latah, five and ahalf miles east and one mile south of Spangle.
All seem to be a product of a huge volume of water flowing southward
toward Pine Creek channel.
The new data (Cache Cr. Valley) regard-
ing depth ofwater in the PineCreek channel
I35 ft. above station at
Malden) indicate thehugeness of the glacial river across the col between
Latah and North Pinebreeks, and the combination seems to demand the al
abandonment of the idea that-a-_ of a Lake Latah, , farwhich North Pine
Creek was the outlet.
Instead, thewhole of Latah Creek from its
mouth to the North Pine col seems to have been filled deeply with
glacial outwash carried upgrade along the valley bottom by a great river.
in support of this isthe presence of fairly well marked scabland sur-
faces up to 2500 east of the Spangle-Mt.Hope road crossing (five and
a half miles of Spangle).
They are rright in line and right in at
altitude for a river headed for the col, a river using lower Latah ,
reversed.
Such a river, iffequely deep on the col as at Malden, would have
had an upper surface of about 2550 over the col.
necessary to get theerratics floated back to Mt Hope at 2550.
This iswhat is
And
erratics stranded there at that altitude demand such a depth of water
in the channel or else an initial cannel floor much higher than that
left at theclose of the episode.
New data about Mt Hope are very interesting.
Erratic cobbles,
pebbles and small boulders were found on the hilltop three quarters
of a mile south of It Hope at 2550 plus.
The pebbly loessor silt
in fine development was found at the head of the grade up from Duncan
at about 2400.
Mt Hope.
This was five and a half or six miles northwest or
Theupper limit was not carefully sought for but should be
easy to find for the silt at 2400 is " feet thick and very sharply
morked off from the loess by its gritty and pebbly content.
crosses a hill ahove 2650 about five miles northwest of Mt Hope.
The road
should take one above the upper limit of the flood silt.
This
The silt in the valley bottom, well laminated tho not definitely
verved, contains a. few erratio pebbles and is more like that of Lake
Missoul/ than mything else seen in the vidinity of Spokane.
quite unlikelyathat the pebbly silt 300 to 400 350 feet above it.
It is
It and theband and gravel associated seem logically to be a product of
ordinary melting and outwash from the first blocking of Latan up to


88% ave
mer + subangeler
9%+ brolimerand
2% - ron
( Tammani y Ba
fine grave
.


33
the meximum of theglaciation.
This must have filled the valley up
nearly to the level of the north Pine outlet which, theoretically,
was the dischargeway.
Then, with the beginning of the retreat
and the bursting of Lake Missoula, came thelbig flood and the spreading
of the berg-borne erratics and the pebbly silt over the lower uplands
up to 2550 and perhaps a little more.
East of Spokane
July I9 m I929
The westernmost prominent spur of/granite on the south edge of
the Spokane Valley lies just west of the Chester embayment and the
Milwaukee RR route thru the Mica pass.
This spur islargely bare
granite up to 2900 at least and perhaps to 3000.
There was no op-
portunity of reading it closely either from map or aneroid.
But
there is a pronounced break here, all the alopes below being largely
bare rock and all the slopes above being largely covered with soil.
What ledges do outcrop are very much decayed granite or gneiss while
the ragged knobs below this altitude are fairly fresh rock.
Furthermore, thepare andragged lower northern part of the spur is
cutby about a dozen transverse hotches, as much as 75 feet deep.
Some of them bifurcate, one group consists of two on the east slope and
three on the west;
Three or four marked nock basins with cattail
or sedge marshes and standing water occur in these notches.
West of this|group of notches on the bare spur and amost as high
is a very definite bench of debris, covering 40 acres or more.
Its
valleyward margin isvery steep and 300 feet high.
Most of its surf-
ace is flat and cultivated.
A pronounced broad ridge 40 feet
abovelthe flat encloses it almost completely between itself/and/the normal
erosion slopes ofthe higher hills to the south.
Thebroad ridge is
either a moraine or a high bar.
No morainic forms were seen on it
tho there are boulders here and there.
Most of it appears to be a
granitic sand.
No good cuts andho structure seen.
Its location
to thee lee of thebare, gashed spur suggests a bar origin.
Above the flat back of the broad ridge are scattered erratic
boulders for a hundred feet of altitude.
Frobably these continue
all theway over to Moran where there is glacial drift.
But thespur
itself, above the bare portion, yielded no evidence of glaciation.
Howhigh isthedrift about Moran?
A large granodiorite porphyry boulder found on thebare shoulder.
It was the only erratic recognized here.
The main valley flat, west of the northern part of the rocky spur
has a bar on it about 50 feet above the little enclosed flat at its
very head, and according to the map, 2300 ft A.T. at the highest place.
West of this embayed flat is a considerably smaller spur of granite.
It was not limbed but the ragged granitic scabland topography is cons-
picuous on thelower part, even thru the yellow pine forest.
About a mile south of Trent and south of the Spokane River is a
group of granitic knots in the midst of the gravel plain, here the low-
est of thevalley gravel fill.
Anderson, Large says, reported glacial
striae on these knobs.
Large guided us to the place.
Thepolished
surfaces remaining are clearly only the work of water and its debris.
Tho smooth, the surfaces are irregular with low ridges andepressions
and there are no strine.
Many more surfaces were found than Large
knew of.
A few places found where channelways a few inches dees-
across and a few inches deep were still decipherable.
Remnants of two
potholes found, each with the polish remantig in places.
No glaci al
ice isrecorded here in these markings.
The highest hill isprobably
100 feet above the river, perhaps that high above the surrounding
gravel plain.


Thelost Tells gorge, from which theriver has been diverted, has
similar surfaces and shapes.
It also is a fine narrow canyon in the
gneiss, much better than any of the high-level gashes seen this
forenoon.
Butt and the associsted rook knobs and emmlier abandoned
channels are of thesame category as those on thespur.
The Postlolls bard either drops off to the east or, more probably
has been eroded away on its eastern part by theglacial stream which
made thehigh steep scarp on theorth and west of thePost Falls moraine
remnant, two miles east of town.
The material of themoraine, exposed in cuts on the steep road up
near the west end is rather small river gravel.
No clean cuts.
A very few boulders on top, nothing at ail like thecoarse cobbly and
bouldery river drift of theSpokane Valley farther west.
If it were
not for the topography on top, I would call this a high level outwash
terrace.
Possibly it is a pitted plain, but the topography does
not support this interpretation.
For itisdefinitely ridged.
The
ridges are elongated nearly north-south, a position which does not sup
port theidea that theice which made it came from the north.
Thetop of this moraine ishot far from thealtitude of the morainic
henches along the south side of the river here.
It looks as tho the
moraine had once extended completely across the course of the river
to the south.
Since the stream now has a wide valley here, it has
required plenty of time to remove this missing part of the moraine.
Vicinity of Lake Coeur D'Alene
July 20 I929
Drifted erratic boulders, about twenty of them,
stranded on a
little flat at 269I B.M. near Silver Beach.
The granodiorite
porphyry is among them.
A
few with poor glacial markings.
trace ofany drift higher on this slope.
This isthehighest drift yet
found about the lake and looks like an upper limit.
Its failure
to occur higher points to berg drift, not glacial drift.
The
al oseness of this figure with other maximum altitudes of such material
about thellake also indicates this.
269I ishearly 2700, , nearly
I50 feet higher than the It Hope erratics andhelps to make the picture
of a glacial river, not a glacial lake, connection between Loke Coeur
DIAlene and thescabland channel heads.
hypothesis.
This isrequired by the flood
A quarter of a mile east of the B.M. along the road is a flat at
26I0, on which there are very many erratics.
Theflat bears a silt
Pull of pebbles and comese grains of rock, of various kinds.
It
seems identical with the|glacial pebble silt except that its matrix is
hard and clayey, not friable, like theloess, nor as light colored.
The deposit is identifiable for 30 feet up on the slope above thefflat.
It is fully possible tirat this pebbly silt is the product of slope
wesh, etc./ sire theerratic debris was deposited.
It seems almost
impossible that a turbulence adequate for transportation of this mixture
could have existed this for up a valley like theCoeur D'Alene.
Yet
this isprecisely what the valleys along the east side of scabland a11
show.
Another high point for berg drift islabout a quarter of a mile still
V
farther east.
Erratics were found here up to 2695 A.T.
Thedivide between Blue Creek and Wolf lodge Greek at about 3000 2
But no silt.
carries large numbers of poorly worn but stream-carried cobbles, chief
ly of quartzite.
almost e, sandstone now and much staired.
The materiel leery much decomposed for quartzite,
It belongs with the stream
gravel seen south ofMica, Idaho, and somewhere in Anderson's series of
old baselevellings.
It isntglacial.


35
Therratios west of Beouty Bay in thesaddle crossed by theroad at
along the south side ofwolflodge Bay, occur at least up to 2590.
The highest found was o. granodiorits porphury.
Down therelatively
gentle grade west of this saddle are pebbly silts andsands in the shallow
tow cuts.
Two silt samples were collected, the lover one comins
from a prominence rather than a re-entrant along the valley wall.
thus ishot so likely to be a reworking.
Near Echo Bey a findfravel and sand deposit is out by the hiway.
The debris is 99% basalt and very angular, the largely fresh.
few very pronounced slivers found but most of the angularity is not
exceptional.
Foresets well shown, dipping toward the lake.
Five
feet of rust overburden, largely of alluvium with angular fragments of
basalt.
This ravel seemsvery likely a shore deposit, perhaps
deltaic.
A granite boulder, resting on top, may record it as older
than Spokane.
Hothing more than water-laid debris or gilt deposits seen from
Echo Bay to Harrison.
Ferfy taken here to a point directly west
across the lake and road thence to if Worley, Ford and Coeur D'Alene.
No erratics seen from car up to 2600.
A search at that altitude
revealed no silt and only one small erratic pebble.
No trace of
gLacial waters aboutorley.
A large granite boulder three or four
feet max. diameter, lies along the road south of Ford, altitude about
2575
Many more farther down the valley.
But no pebbly silt.
The icinity of Bellgrove is an undulating plain whose B.M. at
the north end (thehigh end) is 2585.
Plenty of erratics all over
the plain.
Also pebbly sit with bits of non basalt and non-gneiss,
V
The highest erratics liest 2685 on the east slope of the enclosing pre-
basalt hills at the north end of theflat.
One %of these is a boul-
The local rock here is hornblende
schist and vein quartz.
Several erratics at the BM are striated
and glacially bruised.
Slopes sEarched
- above 2700 but no foreign
material found.
The Mica flat, five or six miles farther north, is about the same
altitude and is similarly strewn with erratic boulders and bears a
better-marked pebbly silt, a material very like that found at 269I
north of Silver Bagch.
The upper limit was not found here for the
slopes above 2600 or 2650 are covered with brush.
Nowwe know that the pper limit of any glacial water in Lake Coeur
D'Alene 'basin does not exceed 2700, tho itcomes almost to it.
know that glacial pebbly silt occurs up to 2500 and 2600 about the
north end ofthelake,
That the erratics are unweathered and that s
some are glacially marked.
There must have been glacial ice or
glacial moraine or a vast volume of glacial water in the valley north
of Coeur D'Alene Lake to impound this water to that altitude.
Yet #
the outlet must have been thry that valley or at least along the south
wall of the valley, with ice as the north wall of the channel.
It
seems absolutely necessary to find field evidence of this discharge,
tho of course one may argue, without such evidence, that the discharge
was over, thru or under glacial ice out in the valley.
tant points thus far established are
The importa-
I- 2700
¿ the upper limit oftheponding in Coeur D'Alene Lakevalley,
2- the existence of the pebbly silt up to 2600 in thenorthern part of
the valley,
3- glacial ice Itself very close to closing the north mouth of the valley
A delta of poorly worn gravelly andoobbly debris lies just west
of the former site of It. Sherman.
ding in the steep southern face.
A pit exposes good foreset bed-
The angle between the frontal slope
and the top slope is 250 feet above present level of the lake, nearly
2400 AT.
Traced northward, thedelta surface has abundant knobs


36
of basalt 5 to TO feet above its plane surface.
North of this is
the northern slope down toward theriver, composed of basalt.
This
delta is at least 300 feet lower than the upper limit offerratics, and
it dates from a somewht different ponding level, tho not necessarily
from a different glaciation.
Thebranodiorite porphyry found in this
delta's material.
Many boulders of granite on top, tho most of the
large boulders are of basalt.
Vicinity of Coeur DIAlene
July 2I I929
The north side of the shoulder between Cougar Creek Bay on the
south and SpokandRiver on the north is a broad ledge of basalt
reaching a little above 2500 feet.
Theridge itself reaches 2800
and is composed ofgneiss, well covered with residual soil.
The basalt bench has numerous cliffs and knobs of bare rock and its de
bris cover, where present, is glacial afift.
Striated erratic
cobbles and boulders were found up to 2600 or 2650 on the gneiss ridge
above the basalt bench, and thebench itself carried definite small
moraine ridges andndrained depressions.
There are two notches thru the gneiss ridge, south of the basalt
bench, anchot two miles west of thedelta at the east point of the shou-
lder.
They are 2650 AT at the bottom.
Neither one isa gash.
Both are simply saddles but one has much bare rock in the bottom and
on thelower slopes, an abnormal thing.
But to use these notches 2
for glacial water or lake water seems difficult because of the lack of
real trenching andthepresence of a residual soil cover on the slopes.
they are lower, however, than the highest floated erratics in Coeur
D'Alene lake basin and if they de-net were not used, they should must
either be younger features (impossible) or they must have been blocked
or had drainage thru them blocked by glacial ice.
Glacial moraine
at 2500 and abundant erratics to 2600 or 2650 just north of them seems
to indicate that the idea of blocking is correct.
perhaps a little
spill thru isindicated by thebare rock in the bottom of one notch but
it apparently was inconsequential.
The basalt bench isvery interesting and suggestive.
It has a
very irregular surface, a real channeled scabland durface, with knobs
andrettles buttes andridges separated by anastomosing channels, two of
which are very definite.
These channels run along thebench, not
across it toward the much lower land along the river.
relief is as much as 50 feet.
Altikule rampes from 2480 to 2560 + .
The local
Since the bench carries glacial moraine, one coudd think that this
scabland is the product of glacial plucking
a simulation of such.
and thechannel forms only
But there are two serious objections to
this view;
I. a spur orbasalt of similar character, just south of the lower end
of Hayden Lake, was traversed by the ice without production of any such
topography.
So with thebasalt bench east of Ramsey, that west of
Hayden Lake andmany square miles along the north edge of the plateau
west of Spokane.
3- If the basalt was pluched out by glacial ice, it here would be carr_
ied in only one direction, southward, uphill.
There is no such
quantity of baselt in thelimited drift bank against this wall.
There seemsno escape from the conclusion that these are true
weter chennels and that the debris was carried laterally, a ong the o
channels, out off the bench.
Glacial water could &
ice or moraine were banked up abng theorth edge of the bench.
this only if
Yet there is good moraine in these channels.
One woulder of
basalt I5 ft high and IB by 25 stands almost in themiddle on a low
morainic ridge.
The channels were here first; the drift was deposit-


37
ed later.
Just what thismeans/ent yet cler:
But it definitely
establishes% sequence her.
It reminds oneforcibly of the low
morainic ridges on Sunset Prairie, even in the head ofpne of the
channels here (Menday Lake or Siiver Inket! WillnuLake)
Drifted erratic boulders andcobbles are abundant on the hill
V between French Canvon andfernan Lake, up to 2665.
Many are well
striated
thin faint suggestions of it.
Butho moraine topography seen here, or/at least no more
Apparently these erratics are berg-
carried.
Above their level, the fields are full of the weathered
subanguiar to subrounded Quartzitepebbles and cobbles seen south of
Mica and on the divide between Blue Creek andsilve Wolf Lodge Creek.
Their uniformity of material, their advanced degree of weathering,
and their lack of/striae make confusion with the glacial erratics im-
possible.
The Post Falls moraine topography is well marked on the eastern
and lower end, and is in contrast with the very subdued knoll and sag
topography of the prairie to the east and and to the west.
If the
lower prairie about here is morainic, it is only weakly expressed
ground moraine.
The big moraine hill has cobbles and boulders scat-
tered on it, some of the boulders very angular.
But most of it is
composed of rather fine river gravel.
No definite moraine ridging aldngthe east side of the prairie
from Coeur D'Alene city to Hayden Lake.
Some places show faint ÷÷
ridges subparallel with the rock hill base.
The lower slopes of
these hills are scrubbed and scabby in places but do not approach the
features on the spur west of
Chester.
Thelow ridge in themouth
of Hayden Lake valley isflat-topt and is composed of well-washed,
well-stratified gravel in the only cut seen •
The exposure is
nearly the full height of the terrace .
The gravel is gright only
in the lower part.
Its upper rusty zone is 6 to 8 7 of possibly
I0 feet thick.
Rathdrum Prairie
Sunday PM July 2I I929
The problem of this prairie is solved.
It is ground moraine
of exceptionally pebbly till.
Its topography of low sags andswells
would be good enough for ground moraine anywhere if the sags were
accentuated by swampss and ponds.
But the dry climate and porous
soil do not allow this.
Where railroads cross theprairie, their
cuts and fills show clearly that the relief is adequate and properly
arranged.
The abundant large boulders are better explained by this
hypothesis than by the idea of glacial river transportation.
Further-
more, many of these boulders are not rounded.
The only good evidence not found for ground moraine isstriated
boulders and till structure.
Striae were not looked for, and there
are no adequate sections to show till structure, , ifit were present.
The excessively gravelly character of the material fer-several
has mode me think for several field seasons that thisprairie was outwash.
The distribution of the minor local rellef in a gently sloping plain
was also deceptive.
But now this ground moraine is seen to harmonize
with the very gravelly character of the Post Falls T.M.; anothe POlson
moraine may be brought in for comparison.
Apparently, these inter-
y montende valleys contained large amounts of stream gravel when the ide
advanced, and th&s , rather than angular rook material/ ground off a
rock bed, supplied the drift.
It isto be noted, however, that the extreme south margin of the
drift, on and above the basalt bench described this forenoon, is not
strikingly pebbly but looks much more like an ordinary boulder clay.


38
lacross.
the Rathdrum Prairie ground moraine/ is eroded The
Wisconsin spillway.
It heads abut two miles north of Athol and its
course to the west edge of the Rathdrum sheet is marked by the course
of the main line of the NPRR •
Thus it swings from the middle
of the valley at Athol to the east side at Chilco(a Spokane Internat-
ional RR. station due east of Ramsey) and back to the west side at
Rathdrum.
Near Sheridan, It is 125 feet below the Rathdrum Prairie
ground moraine.
At Athol, its scarp to the west of town is I25 feet
high.
Its floor is iffegular, in places fluted, but not terraced
so far as seen.
The prominent scarp covered with huge boulders,
noted about a week ago north of Liberty Lake and Post Falls, is the
eastern bluff of the Wisconsin glacial river.
Thewidth varies but
averages at least a mile.
Near Athl it apparently reaches complete-
ly over to the rock hills near the foot of Pend Oreille Lake, a width
of four miles.
Is it a valley train?
The answer should be NO.
It is
an eroded channel with an indetorminate, and probably indeterminable,
fill of Wisconsin gravel in thebottom.
Farther west, out on the
Spokanesheet, it probably changes to a valley train and so continues a
down the Spokane Valley toward the Cohimbia.
The so-called high bar directly north of Post Falls is very prob-
ably moraine.
It has shallow but undoubted sags in it and no chan-
nel scarps across it.
Starting here, one remains on this slightly
and gently undulating topography all the way eastward around the north
end of the Post Falls T.M. to the main area of the ground moraine.
The only break isin the channel that comes along the north side and we
west end of the Post Falls T.M.
This channel appears to head on the
ground moraine, not to cross it from the north.
The prominent west~
facing scarp of the so-called Post Falls bar may be a scarp cut by the
Wisconsin waters, tho it also may b an original front and it may be
that it is like the channel just noted around the P.F.T.M., a product
of theaters escaping during the closing stages of the Rathdrum Frairie
ground mora ne glaciation.
Where the big bars of Liberty Lake, etc., belong is/yet to be defi-
nitely decided.
The relation of the Rathdrum Prairie ground mor-
aine to the Post Falls terminal moraine is also uncertain.
The age
is also urcertain, and the relation of the whole to the Spokane Flood.
It may be suggested now that the Spokane Flood was earlier than
the building of either the ground moraine and the terminal moraise, the
two assumed to be of the same age.
This would put the flood back
another glaciation, and would ask for a glaciation for which there is
at present no know morainic material in this valley between Pend Oreille
and the channel heads.
But this would allow the ground moraine and
terminal moraine to exist unmodified by any bursting Lake Missoule and
it would allow the morainic deposits to lie in the scabland channels
of theasalt bench and on the basalt plain of Sunset Prairie.
But since the Post Falls and Rathdrum Prairie moraine and ice
obviously made the 2700-foot glacial lake in Coeur D'Alene lake velley
this lake cannot by this explanation be made contemporaneous with the
scabland of the plateou.
Spirit Lake Moraine
July 2I
T929
The plaint east of this moraine and I25 feet higher than the Athol
chennel is not outwash as was thot a few days ago.
It is ground
moraine.
Its topogrophy is similar to the Rathdrum ground moraine,
its position on the valley side of the Spirit Lake T.M. is correct for
ground moraine and wrong for outwash, and it is composed of very srav
elly till
A section in the soarp west of Athol shows 75 feet of


may be
It seemsvery probable that the Spirit Lake terminal moraine
Which iscontinuous with that west of Lone Mtn., ,is the same in a e
and is also the same as the Rathdrum Prairie ground moraine andthe
Post Falls terminal moraine.
The ground moraine just west of
the Athol channel was traced north onto the Sand Point sheet.
Here
a* is a grent channel out into it, its scarp nearly 300 feet high,
and Hoodoo lake and Hoodoo channel at the foot.
A very marked
terrace exists midway down this scarp on the south side of the Hoodoo
channel (see Anderson, who isright about the Wisconsin discharge thru
it at a later stage of Wisconsin glaciation).
This terrace is an
extension of the Athol channel level and should be a record of the
earlier Wisconsin waters escaping from a Hoodoo lobe of Wisconsin ice.
Where is themoraine of this Hoodoo lobe?
Granting tht there was a Spokane Flood and assuning that ithras
caused by the bursting of glacial Lake Missoula, there has been no
glacial Jake Missoula since the Rathdrum Preirie ground moraine was
deposited, unless stagnant ice protected the glecial topography.
Vicinity of Spirit Lake July 22 I929
The moraine, traversed northward from Spirit Lake for about 3
ends abruptly in a scarp more than 200 feet high, north of
which isthe floor of a channel leading west from Hoodoo Valley thru
Spirit Valley to Clark Fork at Newport.
This scarp is continuous
with the one at Athol and that south of Clagstone.
It is an eros-
ional scarp without doubt and it isolates the area of moraine about
Spirit Lake and Iwin (Tish) Lake from other moraine of the same age
by Wisconsin channels.
To a surprising extent , thes tract of
morine is separated from the mountains to the west by a fosse.
The
slender north end of Spirit Lake is in thisfosse which continues com-
pletely thru to Spirit Valley, wherelit opens onto the floor of that
channel.
A dry valley, very similar otherwise to the one at the
north end of the lake, extends a mile toward the south from the east
end of the lake.
And the lower one of Twin Lakes is in the fosse.
This is no erosional valey.
has morainic topography on its slopes.
It ishery variable in width and it
The ice lobe in the great
valley may have crowded up on the mountain slopes but it did not drag
up its basal debris quite to the foot.
A traverse up
Blanchard Creek valley shows glacial dfift almost
to thehead of the valley.
The granodiorite porphyry is present in
this drift.
A series of very good sections up the serpentines to
the summit between Ilk and Blanchard shows nothing but weathered
granite and gneiss above the ypper limit of this dfift, 2630 A.I.
The Spirit Channel or Blanchard Channel is 75 feet below the drint
in the entr nce of Blanchard Creek to the channel valley.
Tho this
looks very much like erosion by Wisconsin waters and almost doubtless
is such, the channel does not show the trench-like character to be
expected.
The slopes are gentle.
Yet Fish Lake and a swamp
occa ying the lowest of the channel tell clearly of an abandoned glac-
fel river channel.
The only aternative to theidea of glacial
river erosion for these Wisconsin spillways is that of interslecial
stream erosion.
This seems totally inadequate.
Foreset gravel dips into Spirit Lake from the east end, also into
Tishn(Twin) Lake valley.
level. of the moraine where thelown stands.
Spirit Lake surface is I30 feet below the
the depth of the fosse also.
This is a measure of


40
V
The apparent channel from Might Mile Prairie round back of
Tone Mountain Iéprobably ground moraine, the oast of an ice tongue.
It las morainic expression in many places and hangs IIO feet above the
bottom of the Wisconsin channel at Rathdrum.
Rathdrun Prairie
July 22
I929
A ledge of basalt about I00 feet high outcrops along the east
edge of the Wisconsin spillway just five miles directly east of Rath-
àrumo.
Its surface is but little more than a mile wide and east of
it are low granite or gneissic hills with a deep residual soil, on
which lies the Spokane till with abundant unveathered erratics.
This
continues eastward to the head of Hayden Lake, thehighest altitudes
reached being 2900.
Evidence here that the higher land between
lastden Lake and Rathdrum Prairie is not all basalt, and that the Spokane
ice did not eroded deeply in passing
Thnu this part of the valley.
A few erratics on theleast side of the lake valley, at the north end,
but no till seen or probable here.
Plenty of thepld quartzite gravel
in places on this spur between Hayden Lake and Rathdrum Prairie.
The terraces along the north side of the valley at Rathdrum and
thence testward are all composed of stream gravel, so far as sections
and soils show.
The one at Rathdrum and reaching northward to
the gashed notch two miles north of Rathdrum is 240 feet above the
town or 2445 ft. A.T.
It has an undulating surface that suggests
ground moraine but no really undrained depressions.
Its steer
frontal slope ishotched by several small steep-walled ravines, otherwise
its surface shows no marks of erosion.
A section 30 to 40- feet below
the summit shows well-sorted, stratified stream gravel, mostly horiz-
ontal but with slightly inclined current bedding also.
This gravel
is not well worn, and is prevailingly fine.
Erratic pebbles are
abundant.
No trace of erratic material was found above the terrace
top.
The first terrace west of town is also 240 feet above Rathdrum.
It has a definite marginal ridge, making of its surface an enclosed
depression, now drained by a narrow valley.
(P26)
The next terrace down the valley is the one previously described,
containing a marsh.
Its barrier ridge is about 40 feet lower than
the other two, at least where the road crosses it.
Some of its
exposed gravel on the frontal slope is current bedded.
The next terrace westward is mapped without a marsh but has a
4.0.9.
shallow basin, nevertheless, which is/green and apparently very poorly
drained.
There is, therefore, here a situaton similar to the other
tWO•
The surface here is 2400 A.T.
Neither Sucker (Hauser nor Neman lakes are confined by such
high barriers as the foregoing terraces constitute, or as Liberty
Lake possesses.
The barrier at the mouth of Sucker Lake
"is a very
definite ridge 60 feet above the Wisconsin channel floor and nearly
that high above the lake surface.
The back slope of this bar is
somewhat crenulate, while the front slope is uniform.
Newman Lake
has only a very low barrier ridge.
Both of these lakes lie in
rather capacious valleys.
If Newman Lake valley were ponded to the
foot of the hills about it, as is Hayden, it would be equally large.
Its drainage area is two thirds or threefourths as large as that of
Hayden.
Neither of these lakes has the high barrier.
This may be
because one was never built ( a curious thing when these features are
found both east and west along the valley wall), or because the barrier
have been removed by erosion.
The latter may be the correct expl-
anation for Sucker Lake does possess a spur on the west side of its ver
valley mouth, a spur thatlooks like a remnant of the high feature.


41
they might not be present
Plenty of variants
are known among the true channel bars of the scabland.
Both Newman
and Sucker lakes have fairly large drainage areas and it might be ar-
gued that post-Spokane, pre-Wisconsin erosion by their streams could
clean out their Spokane deposits, or in thecase of Sucker, partially
clean them out.
Newman Lake to Peone Prairie to Pleasant Prairie
July 23
I929
There are erratics on the west side of Newman Lake un to about
2580.
Very few and probably berg-floated in Lake Spokane.
Two foreign pebbles ( one four inches in diameter) close to the
summit of the divide between Peone and Newman valleys and on the west
v side.
dant and Altitude a little above 27 hi casant Prairie.
At 2660, erratics are abun-
2660 has
a fine cabbection, including several boulders.
Fragments all feesh,
some very well striated, grandiorite porphyry present in two ½p|74#*$
pieces in different places.
This erratic material is high too high
for Lake Spokane and is a continuous fragmentary mantle down to the
till-covered Pleasant Prairie.
It therefore records the Spokane ice
of Little Spokane Valley, here nearly crossing the divide to enter
Newman Valley•
The presence of the grandiorite here and also in
3.
v large pit half a mile south of B.M. 243I (east end of Pleasant Prairie)
shows that it travelled as dfift in the Little Spokane lobe.
The mature topography of the east part of this prairie is older
than Spokane.
Most cuts show a deep residual soil under the erratic
deposit.
The pit above noted shows poorly sorted bouldery debris, apparent-
ly a till that has been worked over somewhat by glacial water.
Fores
sets dip southward, toward Spokane Valley.
Abundance of striated
surfaces shows that this material did not travel far from its release
by the ice.
The gravitattant Frairie and spokene Valley.
July 23
sulled over the basait brink at the east end of this
little plateau Into Spokane Valley did not form any delta- topped denos.
it above 2I40 A.T.
At that level, there is a marked terrace, noted
in earlier years, but it may bs well belong to the Spokane Valley system
as to the minor spill off the prairie.
Its volume seems too great
for derivation from the north.
A fine section in it shows well-
sorted fine gravel and coarse sand without delta foresets tho with
current bedding.
A survey of the Spokane Valley, after descending to its floor,
shows this terrace at 2I40 to belong clearly to the group we havebeen
tracingwestward from Rathdrum.
Another remnant is in the mouth of
the capacious valley immediately west of Newman Lake valley and oppo-
site Otis Orchards NP station.
sides at 2I40,
This valley has remnants on both ed
the same altitude just noted.
Apparently, there was
once a complete fill across the mouth and a marsh or lake farther back
but the high edge has been trenched and a stream valley developed.
Most of the flattish tract back in this valley, nearly I00 feet above
Otis Orchards, appears to be the original fill and its consequent up-
valley accumulation immediately after deposition.
But there is also a definite var ridge in front of this partially
dissected fill, a ridge with a very smaoth, slightly ourving steep front
with a narrow gash across it where the stream escapes and with a diff-
erent aspect to its gravel.
The older fill is composed of fine


42
gravel, largely horizontally bedded, well-sorted but poorly worn,
while the bar (or at least its upper part) is composed of noticeably
coarser gravel, well worn, with foresets dipping back into the trib.
valley from the main.
The bar summit descends about 25 feet back
toward the flat, where the surface rises into the remnants of the older
gravel to be I0 to 20 feet higher than the bar.
No good sections,
properly located, to show the depth of staining.
The older gravel h
has 3 to 5 feet of dust or alluvium on it in one section, the bar has
gravel to the grass roots.
This descending series of terrace remnants along the north side of
Spokane Valley, from Rathdrum to Spokane, seems te-skew- elearly to
include the broad fill of Lidgerwood terrace, whose altitude and
height above the Wisconsin valley train are right for such classific-
ation.
Two different views of their origin as terrace tenants are poss-
Ible, both based on thelidea that they are belong to the episode of gla..
ciation recorded by the Rathdrum Prairie ground moraine.
I- They are remnants of a complete valley train reaching to and past
Spokane.
Thetest for this will be the ontinuation of the series
farther northwest, down the Spokane.
2- They are bars bailt back in re-entrants by the Spokane Flood.
Under the first fiew, the removal of almost all the material,
leaving only these small remnants, largely undissected by runoff from
the higher slopes above them, could be ascribed to the Spokane Flood.
This puts the flood after, or during the later stages of, the Rathdrum
Prairie ground moraine glaciation.
It makes it necessary to keep
the prairie and the Post Falls T.M. covered with ice during the flood
in order to preserve the morainic topography.
It leaves the origin
of the scabland basalt bench, just west of Coeur D'Alene city, out of
the flood record, for this scabland is older than the moraine which
occupies its channels.
It recuires the removal of a very great amt.
of debris by way of the scabland channels, a feat requiring a hoist of
300 feet yust west of Spokane.
It seems impossible.
Yet if the valley train it represents is the same age as the
Rathdrum Prairie ground moraine, the moraine is undissected while the
valley train is almost wholly gone.
This seems impossible except by
the flood grossing ice on the Rathdrum Prairie ground moraine.
Thesecond suggestion, that the remnants are really bars, has the
following items in its favor.
A-
edge of most of them.
B-
It explains the higher outer
It relieves one of the diff-
iculty of bottom gradients, in respect to the 2450 floor of the
scabland spillways.
It explains the lack of teen-
ching of/several by the runoff of the tributary valleys in which they
lie.
Bat-this-seeend-saggestion-ignores-thee-deseending-gradieRt-of-
‡he-grewpy-it-@-es-net-weeuent-fer-their-fineness-of-material-and-uri-
fem-stratifieetieny-it-requires-iee-over-the
D-It makes the gravel deposits
along the south side, which seem clearly to be constructional bars,
part of the same series and thus harmonizes the otherwise aberrant fea
ture of great bars along one side, without valley train remnants and o
of high terraces along the other side without my associated bars.
But this second suggestion ignores the descending gradient of the
group, it des not account for their fineness of material and uniform
stratification,
to protect that topography.
it requires ice over the Rathdrum Prairie ground moraine
Perhaps a different assumption should be used to start with.
Suppose that the Rathdrum Prairie ground moraine is younger than these
terraces.
Then the idea that ice ocoupied its site at the time of


43
the Spokane Flood is not needed, , thecontrast in déssection of ground
moraine and valley train is expained, the moraine in the scabland
channels west of Coeur DAlene oity is explained (for the Rathdrun
'rairie ground moraine becomes post-flood).
But the Rathdrum Praine
ground moraine is left without associated outwash unless it is in the
rather unsystematic lower terraces along the Wisconsin channel, terr-
aces that are better explained probably as Wisconsin affairs themselve
The view that these remnants are bars can readily by checked by
study of the Spokane Valley below the city.
If present, they emphati-
cally are not bars.
The Wisconsin valley train rather clearly begins on the west edge
of the Rathdrum prairie sheet.
At Trent Station , , it extends from the
river (or a little southof it) compietely across to the north wall of
the valley.
In Spokane, it extends from the Lidgerwood terrace
south to the basalt sloves south of the business district.
I have been anticipating gravel terrace flats,
deltas or what vou
will, related to the Spokane till of Pleasant Prainie, Five-Mile Prairre
and other similar feature tracts, at 2450 or somewhet higher. Should
If the episode was a sudden and mighty flooding from a localized
source, the general ice edge had too slow a melting rate to build any
deltas or valley trains adjusted to the scabland channels.
If such
features do exist, they mean normal glacial lake water back of the
channel heads.
If they do not exist, the discharge to and thru the
channel heads must have been short-lived.
Yet if the Spokane drift
is younger than the channeled scabland (vide the moraine north of
•dical or Silver Lake this criterion is unusable.
Willow - Granit
Spokane Valley
July 24
I929
The Lidgerwood terrace is rather definitely a part of the system
of fragments from Rathdrum down the valley.
It is the highest terr-
ace in the valley here, as are they where they occur, its altitude
being 2095 close to the southeast corner of Five-Mile Prairie.
Its
bedding is foreset in many places, the foresets dipping variously but,
nearer the cliffs of live-Mile Prairie, clearly anddefinitely toward
the cliff.
Here also thesurface descends 55 feet into a pronoun-
ced fosse which separates the terrace fill from the plateau outlier.
The bottom of the fosse descends northward along the entire east side
of Five-Mile Prairie cliffs.
Lidgerwood terrace extends north to the mid-valley basalt hill 2
miles east of Dartford.
in five miles northward.
It descends about 200 feet (perhaps 250 ft)
This, with the north-dipping foresets,
indicates northward flow of the water which made it.
The surface
near the mid-valley basalt hill is the same altitude as the high sravel
terrace northward along the east side of the Little Spokane valley as
far at least as Chattorov,
It is all Spokane in age,
the Spokane till about Diamond Lake, Eloika Lake, etc.,
related to
the Idgerwood and all the fragments up to Rathdrum are Spokane.
Therefore
The
surface of the Lidgerwood is diversified by a belt of sand dunes which
extend diagonally across from the south end of Five-Mile to Mead.
Maximum relief of the dunes observed is I40 feet.
perhaps 30 feet.
Theaverage is
The terrace breaks off into two minor terraced benches aft the
north, descending to the Little Spokane.
Total descent to the
Wisconsin valley train in the vininity of Whitworth is 280 feet.
Wisconsin velley trains here is definitely marked Off from the Lidger-
The
wood grevel fill.
contact as a grading of one into the other.
There is no pobbibility of interpreting their 2


49
Thelt deerwood terrnce isolerly continued wostward around the
south end of live Mile Prairie, Where its width ishore than a mile.
Its surface here also bears some duney tracts.
It is 20 to 30 feet
lower along the vallyword odge than next to the cloffs.
From this
portion of the high terrace south of Five Mile, the terrace is easily
trnceable northward along the west side of Five mile%
as far as the
Wisconsin valley troin in the Little Spokane vall y, at the north end
of Dive Mile.
Is surface descends something like(80 feet in that
distance but thefiescent from its northern terminus to the Little Spokane
volley train is 240 feet.
The wooded slopes from Nine Mile Bridge, at the mouth of the
LIttle Spokane, downstream for several miles conceal any remnants of
the Lidgerwood (or Spokene age) valley train.
A tributary valley
fill at Tum Tum, almost undissected, is I950 plus or minus, and 200
feet above the very definite Wisconsin valley train here.
Still farther west, at the lower end of Long Lake pond in Spokane Valley
the Wisconsin valley train is very marked indeed, with a fosse in
places between it and the rock slopes.
Here also appears to be a
remnant of the Spokane valley train in a pronounced scarp of gravel to
the north, which rises anyway I50 feet above the Wisconsin valley train,
I must have some readings on this in earlier notes but I probably call-
ed this high gravel Wisconsin in age, thinking it to be outwash from
the western arm of tee bifurcation of the Springdale-Loon Lake Lobe.
If it is Spokane, where is the Wisconsin foutwash from this lobe?
it farther west than we went today?
W st of the power house and
damp at the end of Long Lake?
Today's findings show that a vast valley train, probably Spokane
in age, certainly pre-Wisconsin, once filled the Spokane and I;ttle
Spokane valleys and the empty valley between Pleasant Prairie änd Five
Mile Prairie.
This valley train led down the Spokane Valley toward
the Columbia and if its waters did not escape around the great bend of
the Columbia they could only have escaped thru a Grand Coulee as deep,
or nearly as deep, as the present.
None of the gravel terraces for
found in Spokane Valley this season can be correlated with the channel-
edicabland discharge.
They are all much too low and they have a
definite gradient down the Spokane Valley, showing excape westward past
the channel heads.
If the Rathdrum terrace remnants and the Lidgerwood terrace are
parts of one valley train, It must have been built from ice on Rathdrum
Prairie, presumably the ice which made the ground moraine there.
this be correct, then as that ice retreated, a valley train should hav
been constructed across the ground moraine here, just as it was across
Spokane drift in the Little Spokane valley.
The only part of the
prairie which may record such valley train is what has this season been
called the Wisconsin channel.
This channel isterraced,
terrace being the broadest.
the upper
P rhaps this should be the Spokane
valley train of the retreating phases.
But this highest terrace
in the Wisconsin channel is lower than tle high terrace just north of
Rathdrum, so much lower that one must think that the closing phases of
the Rethorum Frairie ground moraine/A glaciation's discharse eroded
away a good deal of the valley train built at the maximum of the
gleciation.
Perhaps the Rathdrum Prairie ground moraine is a later glaciation
after all.
is hummocky butwash.
Perhaps the Rathdrum Prairie is not ground moraine but


45
Prairies Northwest of Spokane
July 25 I929
Morainic topography is as well developed on Indian Prairie as
on Sunset Prairie to the south.
In places, it probably excels.
One of the most striking moraine ridges issouth of the Indian Prairie
road up from Spokane Valley, about midway 'between Great Northern School
and White Bluff school.
The ridge here is 70 feet above the lowest
land to the north, and perhaps 50 feet above some undrained hollows
to the south.
It isgood moraine, tho not kettly nor kamey.
It is
littered with basalt cobbles and boulders, plucked from ledges and
low cliffs a little way to the north.
A few erratic boulders.
No
sections seen.
This moraine ridge deposit is definitely related to the scabland
cliffs/ and valley slopes that have been noted in previous seasons
along the margin ofSpokane River valley here.
The relationship is
a superposition of moraine on scabland.
The only pobbible way of
making the scabland equal to the moramne in age is to develop the
scabland earlier in the same episode.
Glacial plucking may have =
made this scabland but, if so, the debris was largely removed and a far
smaller quantity was left in its place when the ice retreated.
Another explanation, obviously, is tit the scabland originally cover-
ed this part of the plateau, and that it has subsequently been largely
buried by till, only a belt two or three miles wide being left along
the Spokane bluff tops, , showing thru the moraine cover.
The presence
in very many places of basalt outcrops thru the drift farther west
on Indian Frairie give color to this view.
So also does the
relationship in the channel heads marked by the several lakes among the
steptoes near Cheney.
This will now be described.
The morainic sheet of drift on Sunset Prairie, previously examin-
ed in I927, has a fairly definite marginal ridge, down from which it
descends to scabland rock surfaces in all of the channel heads.
The
ridge probably is nowhere more than 40 feet above this scabland and #
its southern slope is gentle.
But moraine certainly does come very
close to these channel heads and in one place (Willow Lake-GraniteLake
it ispushed completely into the channel head, descending to Willow Lake
itself.
There is no doubt about closure here, there is no possibil-
ity of lateral entrance of channel-making waters here.
Either the water that pa ssed thru these spillways came directly
off the dece then resting on the moraines or the channels are pre-
moraine.
In the first case, it seems impossible to get the quantity
of water required from the narrow ice fronts involved, unlikely that
the rock basin lakes, even if formed, would remain unfilled by outwash
of the closing stages.
In the second case, the objection of out-
wash fIlling them holds equally well.
In other words, there is no
explanation for the survival of the lake basins, even if an explanat-
ion of their origin can be constructed.
The highest erratic seen along the road north of Hite is about a
mile and a half from the station and 2580% A.T.
than any other ver before found in this district.
This is higher
The MArshall "delta" is the edge of an outwash plain lying in front
of the Sumset Prairie moraine and spilling over in fine foresets into
the valley near Marshall.
Altitude of its surface at the brink is
2287, much too low for discharge of its water thru the scabland channel
to the south.
Also it is much too high to be correlated with the
Lidgerwood terrace.
built at or more nearly at the maximum stand of the
It isblder than the Idgerwood, having been
Spokane love.
Its flat surface and abrupt termination indicates a deltaic origin.
It mever extended across the creek valley.
this lake?
Where was the outlet of
channels
Could it have been around northward thru one of the


16
to the west and thence westward along theldge of the ice?
Could it
have been any other place?
A large fragment of the valley fill of Lidgerwood age lies in
the canyon at the junction of Deep Creek and doulee Creek.
Its altit-
ude is 2020.
Cheney, Brown's Butte and Latah Creek
July 26
I929
Granite scabland on the erst side of the danite Lake channel in
a flattish topped shoulder up 60 feet above the lake.
Rocky ledges
go up hicher on the steer scarp back of this shoulder, but are not
clearly remnants of channel floor.
A mid+channel butte 35 feet above
the lake, on the north end of the lake.
Relation of moraine to scabland is no clearer than before.
The
moraine is surely up against the north foot of Brown's Butte where
hillocks of debris stand 30 feet above undrained depressions adjacent
to them.
PLentifully sprinkled with a large variety of erratic
boulders, several of which are well striated.
But the steep slopes
of the butte itself, just beyond the moraine, are soil-covered.
No
scabland to compare with the moraine.
Around the west end of the
Butte is the same situation except that definitely expressed moraine
isnt present,
To the southvest of the butte, the lower slopes are
of loess andbear the loess topography for half a mile out from the
hill.
But on the south side is drift, perhaps moraine, in part;
drift which has come in from theeast.
Here also no relation of
driftto scabland is decipherable.
What looks very much like ground moraine extends southwest from
the butte to Paradise School.
At the school, a gravel pit shows
that outwash ispresent, probably no till.
Thence southwest for about
three miles, the yellow pine forest is growing on basalt scabland of
weak expression but containing a number of old channels, now filled
with sediment and orgänic matter.
No evidence of moraine in here.
A mile north of Dynamite, this scabl and becomes nearly obliterated
under drift and,
Tho there are no good morainic forms here, it seems a
best interpreted as moraine.
The relief of the basalt under the
drift and projecting thru it seems the same as that of the scabland
south of Dynamite.
The same question arises; isthe scabland older
than the drift or is it simply an earlier product of the same glaciation?
Morainic material and some morainic topography on the northem a
part of Paradise a earls, re the big praissed n winded land betra
Marshall Greek and Latah Creek.
part but striated erratics and plenty of unstriated ones beneathe the
sand in some plaees cuts.
Outwash also present up the slope from
Marshall Creek about to the level of the Marshall delta.
this valley, Like Latah, , was largely filled with outwash during the
Apparently
maximum andearly retreatal stages of the Spokane glaciation,
been re-excavated sinee.
and has
In the middle of the Medical Lake channel, east of the south end
of Clear Lake, is a small hill of/argillite, condiderably higher than
the uppermost ledges of basalt.
To its lee is a small bar whose
structure on the west side, show in a gravel pit, is strikingly fore-
set, the dip being southward and destward (out of the Clear Lake channel).


17
Fosses
July 26
I929
A good fosse, 30 feet or more in depth, lies west of the
terrace on which it. Wright stands.
It is folhowed by the Great
Northern RR.
Wisconsin andof Spokane age.
The fosse istruly a bar feature and
indicates the bar-like character and condition of this glacial river
gravel.
It isessentially the same thing as the back slope of a bar
and, by this interpretation, thelakes locked back of valley train
deposits dong Spokane Valley, are simply in very wide fosses, the
widths being along the blocked tributary length.
If this isa
correct view, it may well be that the so-called great bars blocking
Liberty Lake, Saltese Marsh another valleys along the south side of
V Spokane Valley are bars only in their back slope, the frontal or
valley-ward slope being erosional just as are theralley-ward slopes of
the terrace fragments from Rathdrum westward.
The merit of this view is that it gives the high gravel, the
Spokane gravel, of both sides of the valley, the same character; i.e.
Interpretation all en train. ides Other den the
there is a most inharmoniaus
The bar interpreta-
tion was made for two reasons.
The magnitude oftheback slope the
fosse slope was such that it seemed necessary.
The frontal slopes
are not strikingly scarped and appear as truly constructional as the
back slopes.
Furthermore, bars were rather expected here, by the
flood hypothesis.
Since, however, these so-called bars are far
too low for the Spokane Flood, this apparent need disappears and the
intepretation can be made without preconceived ideas of what shoull be
there.
The fosse affords another means of interpreting the lower terrace
below the main Wisconsin valley train level.
If they are only erosi
ional terraces, then where they come agannst higher slopes there should
be no fosse.
The Fort Wright terrace was thought, at the time of
passing, to be the same as the railroad terrace in Spokane and erosion-
al in origin.
If it possesses a fosse, it must be depositional
and therefore the original surface of a valley train.
Better see
the Fort Wright terrace again.
Latah Valley
July 26
I929
The sediments exposed in cuts along the Inland Empire Hiway between
Brown's Butte and Spokane conform to thogeneralization proposed on
July I8.
They arekoarser farther north, finer farther south.
But the cuts do not extend far enough south to expose the dominant
silty phase.
Beginning with the great gravel deposits along the NPRR, on the
east side of Latah Creek Valley, the cuts show mostly sand and silt
where the hivny begins to climb out towerd the south.
a, grade of about 5% about half way up to the plateau level, then a
Here there is
stretch on a rude and irregular terrace,
grade to emerge from the canyon.
then another length of steep
steep grade are all in loose sand, so far as seen.
The outs in the upper length of
stretch, sand alternates with silt.
Ig thelower a
This is departute from the
generalization, perhaps one that indicates the mid-depth terrace to be
a. later deposit made under somewhat different onditions.
The alternation of sand and silt in the lower outs presents some
of the most intricate intraformatonal corrugations in the silt I have
ever seen.
One of the most surprising things isthe presence of
secondary corrugations on the primary ones, and in some places, even
tertiaty corrugations on the pedondary.
minute dimensions and require very good laminations to show it.
These minor ones are of very


48
Thickening andthinning on the corrugations are well shown
The associated sand layers are all current bedded and the
shallow foresets all dip southward.
These sand layers, except
locally, are undisturbed by the crumplings which are very diverse in
shape, location and magnitude in the successive layers.
It is clear
that the settling which made the crumpling occurred during deposition
and ceased by the time the sand above each crumpled layer wass being
deposited.
Where did theater flow which made these current foresets?
It
couldnt flow out to the south at any altitude comparable to that at #
which the strata occur.
Yet the southward flow is indubitably recor-
ded?
Nor isthe gravel along the NPR cuts foreset as delta gravel
should be.
Perhaps, this cut should be seen again.
But could bot#
tom currents, in 200% feet or so of water, make these current foresets?
Would not deltaic foresets be inevitable?
It seems at present that
only a very great volume of southward-flowing water could do this at
such depths, andthis debars any of the fine sandy silt from settling,
as it surely did settle.
Is there here another record of pauses
in the flood discharge?
Why did thepond fill up or so nearly fill
up, if a great flood discharge is here recorded?
Isnt it much more
probable than most or all of this alt and sand was deposited in a back
water of thelidgerwood (and perhaps also of the Wisconsin V.T.) valley
Vfill in the main valley?
If SO,
then there isno record in Latah
Valley of theSpokane Flood.
Traverse from Spokane to Coulee
July 27 I929
Much ofthe moraine on Sunset Prairie, ware cut in road sections,
is very gravelly and rather uniform in size of fragments.
It looks
more like outwash than till.
Probably a great deal of water action
across the ground moraine.
As ground moraine, it is about like
Rathdrum G.M. in general, tho it aso has more marked morainic hills
hills here and there.
That much outwash was deposited here is shown
by tie heavy sand deposit along the steep grade down to Deep Creek from
the east along thehiway.
But on the lower land west of thecreek,
the topography is again ground moraine.
It islifficult to get this
sand up on this slope unless the lower land to thewest and northwest was
ice-covered to protect the ground moraine.
Perhaps this higher
tract east and southeast ofDeen Creek is largely a morainic acaumula-
tion.
Reardan.
The northern bar is considerably the smaller bar.
Wilbur.
washed and almost unworn basalt gravel dipping northwerd from the chan
Bar north as tow ave excellent 0 reset or me y. 00052y
nel.
In one place, a patch of loess still remains under the fore-
set gravel.
Almira.
Excellent bars, four or five of them, in the channel
leading southward toward the Wilson Creek route.
benked up against scabland basalt valley wall.
Photographs of one
The relationship
here is identical with that of moraine banked up against scabland on
Sunset Prairie, except that in this case the agent which made the scab-
Ind also made the bars when in 'different phase, while on Sunset, it
not clear that the ice made thescabland.
Upper limit of
scabland on south side of Wilson Creek channel adong gravel road which
climbs out abovethe stream forks is 20I0.
30 feet higher.
Erratics lie on the loess
Also basalt fragments which are fresh riven pieces.
Depth ofWilson Creek hiverel here is 350 feet, a very surprising
figure.
Hartline.
half miles north of Hartline is 2580.
The triangulation station on the summit three and
The surface of theuplifted
a
treet drops I30 feet in about a mile to thenorth of this station, nog


Dart it mane haled that the bused rach basin here relused to
in splungestral basis, elong
Coulee
The caterat
it such ever exist
"If sack origin
the same place.
, sal the basin wow beques at


49
There is,
beyond which the surface evens out on the plateau.
therefore, a minor anticlinal pucker here.
Highest erratios 8 miles
directly north of Hortline are 2400.
Highest scabland on Spring#
Coulee walls,
, almost overlooking the Columbia on extreme east edge
of uppermost Grand Coulee scabland, is 23824.1.
Altitude of the
old schoolhouse (Columbia Distriot) at hend of Grand Coulee is I530,
according to Major Mopkins, U.S.Army Ingineer.
Grand Coulee
July 29
1929
The silt deposit of upper Grand Coulee has its greatest undissect-
ed remnants within 5 miles or so of Coulce City, , just north of the
rugsed scabland that characterizes the floor at Coulee City.
The
Flow in which this extreme basin, channel and butte topogrophy 1s so
well developed dips northward at a low angle, with all Undother flows
of course, and this dip carries the scabland-maker below the channel
floor.
But with this goes all basalt, so far as surface exposures
ere concerned.
Apperently, theloverlying basalth flows, or few flows,
yielded readily and left no remnants.
They yelded so readily that
there are actually exists a major rock basin for several miles above
Coulee City, filled with silt and its downstream rim consisting of the
rugged buttes and basins that extend thence to the brink of the falls.
The large irrigated orchard above coulee city lies on the silt
terrace and for at least two miles ferther north, theterrace is the
dominant feature of the floor.
It has very few gullies here but is
limited to theastern half of the floor, the western half being occup-
led by a broad channel containing also a silt floor and several very
shallow alkaline basins.
The orchard proprietors pump water from
the level of the flat 80 feet of to the orchard on theterrace.
total relief appears to be 90 feet.
The
And this is apparently all silt,
Nothing else shows in the slope between terrace and channel.
A few miles farther north, the silt deposit on theast side of th
valley is much dissected and has no flat-topt remnants.
Here its£b
height above Alkali Lake flat is 75 feet.
And in one place, it has
been removed completely to the foot of theeast wall of the coulee.
Farther north along Grand Coulee, thesilt exists chiefly in dissec-
ted forms and it looks as tho local rainfall had been responsible for
its removal.
But iflone considers that the main channel thru the =
coulee is nearly a mile wide and nearly I00 feet deep, yet has almost
no gradient and has a number of shallow, broad basins, it seems clear
that a river current thru the coulee subsequent to the deposition of
the silt igecessary to explain this channel.
The silt upper surface is I570 feet AT.
a to the scabland surface about Coulee City.
Mus work out its relation
enoush to form a. dam to determine this upper surface of the silt?
Is this surface high
below the falls?
If not, why isthis silt here with this level top and yet known nowhere
making a dense hard blocky surfdce when dry.
The silt isarve-bedded and very fine textured,
fregnerts, drop from floating bergs, have been found in it.
Yet no pebbles or other,
water
in it!
pond which received I00 feet of rock flour and yet had no bergs
A glacial
What explenation?
Beneath, the silt in one place is a great accumulation of huge
boulders, many of them 4 to 5 feet in diameter and all well worn.
About midway between Coulee City and Steamboat Rook, this bouldery
substratum has lost its silt cover and the surface along a belt parallel
with the coulee walls lestrewn with even greater frgments of granite
and basalt.
fregrents are 20 feet high.
This 15 I2 miles from Coulee City.
Some basalt
These appear much too huge for any ver
stream transportation along the low gradient and they raise the sugges


50
E889 uNtiek 48da bios BasinB6nt moraino, loft by an extension of tho
A splendid bar lies back in an alcove or short wide tributary
gorge entering Grand Coulee from theonst, 9 miles north of Coulee
City.
Its summit is I63 feet above the channel floor and more than
60 feet above nerby remnants of the silt which lap up on the bar
ailer
slopes.
Thebar summit is in the middle of the alcove, about
, 30
or 40/feet above the contact of bar and south wall, and 85 feet above
the bottom of thefosse on theback side.
Along thenorth side, the
bar has steep constructional slopes almost down to contact with the
basalt airs. 20 to 40 feet of erosion has been done here by drain-
ace escaping from the fosse.
The material of thobar is of well-sorted, fairly well rounded
coarse gravel.
No boulders and almost no cobbles seen.
99% plus
is basalt.
Structure on the west slope, facing Grand Coulee, is
ewwwent-deltaie-feresety-thedip-in-exeetly-the-opposite-direobion-se
- - ---Her-ів-ад-ей@н-ваз
She-Ger»ge-of-äke-Grand-Goulee-gleeiel-river,
cherent foreset with dip southward, down they coulee.
Structure
on the enst slope, , facing the fosse, is deltaic foreset, the dip in
exactly the opposite direction
Here is an eddy bar in every
particular needed.
96 0 older then the silt, it requires a glacial
river considerably deeper than it is high for its making.
It may
date from thesame river that left the huge boulders beneath the silt.
It post-dates the erosion of the alcove or short gorge tributary.#
It therefore post-dates the making of upper grand Coulee in its pres-
ent proportions, andthus is much jounger than the high scabland above
the east wall.
this oldest scabland is to be called Spokane in
age, the bar is post-Spokane.
Is it Wisconsin?
Was there ever
such a Wisconsin discharge thru here?
If the Spokane Flood pre-
ceded the glaciation called Spokane, this bar might date from that
glaciation.
Lower Grand Coulee was viewed this afternoon fronseveral salient
points on the high western rim.
Never have I seen scabland so
amazingly portrayed.
It is nearer an aeroplane view than even the
Saddle Mt. view of Drunheller Channels.
The view ranges from Dry
Falls to Soap Lake and well out onto thesouth rim of Hartline Basin.
Tho not all details can be made out, several of the previously
identified features were seen and some new ones.
The hill south
of Bacon, locally called Pinto Ridge, fuses with High Hill (the loess-
Dry Coulee thus does
east of Pinto Ridge.
Nor does Spring Coulee
But Lenore Canyon is a particularly prominent
feature for some distance over toward Dry Coulee.
And another
canyon-coulee, a mile or so north of Lenore Canyon, is also conspicuous
It joins Grand Coulee in the same great embayment,
that also contains the lead of Lenore Canyon.
deeply gravel-filled,
It appears to lead
eastward in thebame way and probably isthe deep canyon previously mapt
across here north of Lenore.
The very extensive gravel-filled area east of the foot of Blue
Teke and head of Lake Lenore (Alkali Lake) extends back toward the east
for about two miles.
merking out the limitsof the gravel.
It has relatively low basalt cliffs definitely
buttes or knobs interrupting it.
There are also no scabland
off abruptly in a 200 and 265 foot descent (two crest lines)
Its surface is rolling and drops
floor of Grand Coulee.
to the
Jasper Canyon by McCann.
Thetransverse canyon north of and similar to Lenore is called
back from Grand Coulee proper,
Near Its Junction with Lenore, about a mile
there is a canyon notoh, equally deep
and wide, across to thehead of Blue Lake, thus making a great scabland
butte here on theeast wall of Blue Lake.
It also is deeply gravel-


51
filled, the gravel disposed wholly in bars.
But the most surprising thing discovered from these viewpoints
is the existence of a definite broad scabland channel east of and
essentially parallel to Grand Coulee channel where occupied by Lake
Lenore, and separated from it by a very narrow, very long and very
shapp ridge.
The ridge is steeply cliffed down to the floor of
both channels.
A part of the ridge, theouthernmost, is consider-
ably higher and is a blade very like that in front of Dry Falls.
the
floor of the newly discovered channel is strongly marked by butte and
basin dopegrapky andhannel topography of the type developed in the
surface flow above Dry Falls, a type without great relief in a flow
made up of small columns.
It looks from the summits, a thousandfeet above Grand Coulee, as #
tho these two channels, with their separating ridge, were the product
of twin waterfall recession, like thery Falls blade and the Potholes
blade.
This interpretation would require that somewhere near the
foot of Blue Lake, the western fall obtained the ascendancy anddeprived
the eastern channel of its share of the water.
Subsequent to this,
deepening in the western or present channel has left this parallel
channel hanging hich above the lakes.
The head of the new channel
is not marked by cascades or cataract it rises irregularly until it is
essentially at the level of the top of the cliffs bounding Lenore
Canyon on the south at the junction with the wide, gravel-filled embay-
ment or lateral canyon.
Lenore Canyon apparently had not been enca-
vated to any extent at that time.
Indeed, it could not be excavated
until the main canyon (Alkali Lake or Lenore Lake) had been out, itself
subsequent to the victory of the western over the eastern spillway.
July 30
An examinati on in this tract, above described, shows that the bar
slope descending to Alkali (Lenore) Lake from the big gravel fill is
200 feet high, that another bar 65 feet higher lies a little forther
back and a third, 330 feet above the lake,lies against the south slope
of the isolated basalt eminence east of Blue Lake.
The basalt high
scabland of this eminence here is 450 feet above the lake.
The examination also shows that the bar in the short transverse
canyon between Jasper and thehead of Blue Lake is I50 feet above the
lake and has a 35-foot fosse on each side to isolate the rounded sum-
mit out in thecanyon.
than the one just noted.
A fosse back among these bars descends 50
Peet below its lowest surroundings, the top of the bar close to the lake.
Lenore Canyon issimply clogged with bars.
thru among them, there is simply a succession of undrained fosse
There is no channel
depressions.
The most pronounced of these is I35 feet deep beldw
the enclosing gravel bars and its steepest slopes are 40 degrees.
Almost no erosion has occurred on these magnificent constructional forms.
Lower Grand Coulee
July 29
The newly discovered channel east of Alkali Lake was entered and
traversed.
The prominent blade of rock at the south tip of the long
spur or ridge separating the two channels is a very spectaeular fest-
ure, about 300 feet above the eastern channel floor.
east and west and almost/unscalable.
It isvery narrow
long summit(a centrol higher ridge stands on that, in turn) is made of
huge columns 4 feet or so in diameter.
The flow which constitutes its
that makes climbing difficult.
These constitute the wall
buttes in profusion.
The columns are I5 to 20 feet long.
The floor of theeastern channel ismarked by holes, channels and
Many of thehdles are undoubtedly plunge pools.


52
They even have overhanging sides in places and are sharply circumscribed
This floor has a
and not interpretable as channel forms, basins.
conspicuous upstream dip which amounts to perhaps 50 feet to the mile
Nevertheless, the development of Boabland forms on it is marked
almost thruout.
In one place, , the basalt is cut by north-south
joints, long ones like those in a sedimentary rook and the basins have
been plucked along them, making them elongate at an angle of 40 degree
or so with the channel length.
It makes difficult the
This upstream dip is a curious thing.
interpretation of the channel floor as such unless one has an enormous
vokume of water to use.
The downstream edge of this flow, where it is highest, is high at
above Alkali Lake on the est.
It appears itself to have determined
a cascade or cataract there.
This high edge is cut by a channel
that was developed as the northern and lower part of the dipping floor
was cleaned off of overlying flows and sculptured into scabland forms.
Thighotch explains in part the erosion of the upstream lower part of
the flow.
Four miles or so upstream from the high edge transverse to the ch
channel is a waterfall cliff completely across the channel, composed
of long columns of thanext higher flow, now removed farther downstream
along the channelf-floor.
A large rock basin lies at the base.
Height of the fall is 50 to 75 feet at least.
The brink of this wide
fall is as low as the floor of the incised smaller channel in the down
stream edge of the dipping flow.
How could a waterfall develop
under such conditions?
Only by the waterfall being entirely
subfluvial.
This situation demands a great volume of water.
The eastern channel, north of the waterfall, rises rather steeply
overtheledges of several flows, marked by irregular cascades, rock
basins and channels.
One rock basin holds a lake, (Bluff Lake),
rimmed on the downstream edge byasheer and/even overhanging rock diff
20 feet high.
Still farther north, the channel loses its unity and
becomes a series of anastomosing smalier irregular channels, separated
by numerous buttes.
Channels are at various levels also.
These
features continue right up to the brink of the cliffs overlooking the
great bar-filled embayment at the head of Lenore Canyon.
It is as
high here as the summit of the scabland butte east of Blue Lake.
It isobvious that when this eastern channel was in operation,
there was not deep western channel where the lakes now lie and there
was no Lenore Canyon.
The eastern channel ispne of the earliest
features of glacial water discharge thru the Grand Coulee route, its
floor at thehead at least 500 feet above the floor left under the lake,
A remarkable feature of this eastern channel isthe almost total,
or total, absence of bars.
The view from the head, on the brink of
the south wall of Lenore, is most startling in the contrast to the
north and the south.
Bars choke the canyoned channels to the north,
rising almost as high as the head of the eastern channel on the south
slopes of the broad butte east of Blue Lake (tho descending 300 feet or
so across the embayment to the foot of the south wall of Lenore)
And not a bar in the high eastern channel!
The interpretation clearly calls for a notable change in conditions
between the abandonment of the high and low channels.
Why any channels
such as these should not have bars deposited in the closing stages of
glacial discharge is difficult to explain.
is to eccumulate bars on the channel floors at such time.
A perfectly normal thing
nel bars could not form while the channel was being eroded.
Such chan-
And to
explain thebbsence of bars in the high channel requires only that during
the erosional phase of maximum discharge, the 500 feet or)deepening


53
scourred, draw ng off theiraterdrather abruptly and diverting the trac-
tion load offeravel elsewhere in the deeper channels.
This argument
ispbviously an application of the flood hypothesis.
Thebars of chan-
neled scabland, where lying in chennele, are the last phose of the
extraordinary episode.
Another feature of great significance is thebxistence of the two
parnile1 channels for sevdral miles.
Twin gorges like these, with
3 stream-swept, greatly eroded yet very sherp definite divide between
are unknown outside of scabland.
Even here they need special explan-
ation.
Thellue is to be found probably in the remains of preglacia
tributary valleys an both east and west of thelouble channel.
On theeast, , two short but flaring trib valleys enter from the
west slope of ligh Hill, joining theeastern channel essentially with
accordant grade, showing that this channel floor was not greatly
deepened by the glacial stream.
Yet these tributaries could not
flow to the western deeper chamel directly, for the long narrow
bare rock divide tises in the way.
The preglacial tributaries now entering Grand Coulee from the west
hang several hundred feet above the lake surface.
re their present
gradients be projected eastward, they will just aboutcross the summit
of the divide separating the two channels.
Thepronounced blade $/%
should represent the location of a shoulder between two ravines from
the west.
Since each channel ishearly a mile wide (?), itmay be
assumed bass- without hesitation that the original width of the pregia-
cial drainage way here has been notably increased by the glacial water.
This widening of thepreglacial route on its western edge would produce
the hang that exists here below the projected profile of the western
tributaries.
Assume, now, that thewestern and deeper channel marks the pregla-
cial route.
The eastern tributaries then must detour to the south to
enter it, not an impossibility, but the preglacial floor must be very
much higher in order to fit in with the profiles of the western tribs.
This, however, is going to be far too high for the preglacial tribs.
from theeast.
The preglacial route, therefore, is theeastern one.
Thelastern route is developed in themearly horizontal strata
immediately east of the monocline.
Thedivide in some places shows
the last of the dipping beds as they turn into a horizontal position.
To the east, the flows pass into a gentle incline upward eastward.
The preglacial route, therefore, is in a shallow syncline here at the
foot of the big monocline.
But thegreat channel of Grand Coulee is eroded in the dipping
beds.
In most places, mid-channel latte low buttes, chiefly as
islands in the lakes, bear te only dipping beds, the flows on both
sides being horizontal in section.
If the shifting of local drain-
are here during the diastrophism located the preglacial course, it
logically should be in thebottom of the downfold.
eastern channel is located.
This is where the
If, now, glacial water should be spilled
over late the divide from thonorth, it would follow the bottom of this
structurel-volley- erosional valley and would alter this by deepening
and widening .
Thewi dening might be more on one side than the
other because dipping beds and horizontal beds probably would differ in
response to erosive attack of a lerge glacial river.
of thelvery much deeper lake-filled gorge in the tilted beds cannot be
But production
a product of such lateral shifting for the high sharp bare rock divide
stands between.
Theimplications are obvious.
There is no logical/way to explain
this deep main chennel of Grand Coulee alongside, but separated from
the preglecial course, except by using thelenormous volumes that the ==
floodhypothesis calls for.
Then, with grent velocity, andlucking


54
ability up on the western slope of the preglacial course, the tearing
out of the broken and flexed basalt would begin anchould proceed until
eventually the main course wuld be shifted over here and the original
course might even be abandoned (see absence of bars).
This procedure seems a bit fantastio, purhops, even when dealing
with a glacial river of such extraordinary volume and vigor.
But
thenly really dirrioult feature to explain is the middledivide between
the two channels.
It should have been torn away while thewestern
channel was developing.
Yet thidhypothesis must be in error for its demands for ropidly
ity offerosion are impossible.
Thegreat volue demanded can not be
maintained inderinitely, a fow years at the most seems all that
can
be granted.
Andir the episode isnt repeated, with similar volume,
all this attack on and removal of the flexed beit must occur during +
this short time.
A bit of evidence on the yielding of basalt is found in the thou-
sands of huge "haystack" rocks on the moraine nortiest of Coulee City.
They are so tremendous, compared with boulders of any other kind of to
rock in the drift, that some explanation seems necessary.
Of course
they are locally derived but this does not explain size, itsimply
explains why thebriginal great size has not been decreased by glacial
trensportation.
In thecolville reservation north of thecolumbia,
the drift in thegranite country does not have excessively large
granites, tho it may be mostly of/granite.
The angwer in part isthat these huge basalt boulders were taken
from the peculiarly favorably located edges that face northword along
the ed e of the plateau.
But similar ice-facing cliffs of rock are
common enough, yet no moraine that I have ever seen has such boulders
of any kind of rock.
A second factor seems indicated and that is the facility with
which basalt yields under plucking stresses.
Incluckingseems to
have been possible where the north-facing cliffs could receive a par-
tial lifting movement of the ice up from the Columbia Valley, or where
south-facing cliffs (there are a few of them) had ice across
from the north.
the top
Most of the ice-worn surfaces of basalt seen are greatly smoothed
and show no plucking out of such surface, i.e. no pitting by removal
of columns or parts of cdlumns.
lift blocks up into itself in plucking operations.
Ice, unlike stream water, does not #
Channeled Scabland within the Glaciated Area west of Grand Coulse.
The Wisconsin Okanogan lobe left such extensive drift deposits
that the bedrock topocraphic details are largely concealed.
In some
areas, however, , the outcropping basalt is prominent.
It seems to
owe Its prominence to an unusual roughness of its own surface, so
great that its relief is greater than the thickness of the drift.
In such places, the character of the bedrock topography can be
deciphered.
It consists of knobs and buttes and hills of basalt,
isoltted and irregularly grouped with reference to the depressions
separating them.
The depressions being continuous, tho themselves
very irregular, can not be interpreted as preglacial stream valleys
(except greatly modified ones.
These features with their overlying
morainic deposits andtopography, look just like those on Sunset Prairie.
either ice erosion or glacial stream erosion has given them the
scabland topographic features.
If ice erosion were responsible,
these features should be present thruout the|laolated area, at least
where basalt 1shear the surface.
But they are limited , so far as


55
Bbservation has gone, to two tracts; a belt two to five miles wide
along the west edge of Grand Coulee, and the region about Grimes Lake,
the northern lake of Moses Coulee.
Especiallj in this region do th
these hills andhepressions in basalt look like modified channeled scab-
land.
Thehead of Moses Coulee is Just north of Grimes Lake.
It is a
an abrupt termination, walled by I00-foot oliffs, identical with the
features of channeled scabland which are called abandoned cataracts.
The basalt above these walls has been strongly glaciated, tho now ob-
scured somewhat by weathering.
A narrow gorge has been cut subseque-
ntly into this cliff by drainage from thehorth across it.
Perhaps
Wisconsin glacial drainage did most, but post-glacial drainage aid has
done some ofit.
The top of the basalt walls isthe irregular floor of several
modified preglacial tributaries which concentrated approzimately at
this place.
Gathering of glacial water into Moses Coulee over a w
width east and west several times that of the culee seems redorded.
This water could easily come across the plateau from thonorth at alti-
tudes lower than 2500.
Mansfield is/2267 and few of the hills to the
east for several miles are higher than 2300 while most of thesags are
less than 2250.
Good evidence for channeled scabland in the lati-
tude of Mansfield was not found.
Thedivide between Foster Creek
drainage andloses Coulee drainage is hardly a mile north of the latitude
of Mansfield.
My former impression of a wide high plateau, with the
coulee heading down in the suth slope, is erroneous.
It ispossible
that glacial flood waters entering the early Grand Coulee route might
have been nearly continuous over the northern part of the plateau, and
even over tle divide with those entering Moses Coulee.
Lake Missoula
may have been thesource of water thru Moses Coulee just as well as it
could have supplied any other channels.
A final question, yet to be answered, is why Douglas Coulee esca-
ped the drenching •
The answer must be that the plateau to the
north and east (separating it from Foster Creek and Moses Couleed) was
too high.
There are no marked elevations in sight but the R altitudes
show Touhey as 236I, Withrow as 25I5, Supplee and Douglas 2282.
This shows a rise of more than 200 feet from Mansfield to Withrow, toy
ward the southwest.
Withrow is almost as high as the uppermost
erratics of the channels near Spokane and higher than any of the chann-
el floors.
Here must have been the high land that prevented the Spo-
kandFlood waters from spilling into Douglas.
Logically, these
waters, iffrom Lake Missoula, should have had a surface gradient
descending westward and 2300 or 2400 may have been the upper limit here.
A tract of considerably higher land lies north of Withrow and between
Mansfield andWaco.
drainage from Douglas Coulee.
This, however, does not entirely block theglacil
A drainage line rather deeply ineised leads eastward thru Silco
to Moses Coulee just south of the moraine.
of Moses Coulee
It is a preglacial trib.
valley, Pelous bison south.
No scalland forms seen. Drift on theorth of this
at the junction with Moses.
It should hang, or be sharply trenched,
"red.
Spokane icesheet margin approximate location will have to be shif-
Must it?
It must have gotten nearly as far south as Withrow.


56
Moses Counse
August I
Scabland knobs, buttes and channelings are marked up on the west
blurs of Moses Coulee along the Sunset Fyway higher then I 300 fest.
They sever ocour on a shoulder between a small trib and the main coulee,
a sholder which was clearly overrun by the great volume.
Another
trib. entering just to the southwest did not recieve the overpour
and has perfeotly normal slopes androfiles and waste cover on its sides
The two are at the same altitude and if one had good lighting we did
not) a interesting contrast could be shown in these two valleys in
the same photograph.
No other explanation can take care of this
contrast.
On the south side of the trib, Valley, just below the juaction of
the two contrasted valleys, is a deposit of very angular, wholly
basaltic debris, heavily mantling the slope and making a definite con-
vexity where it occurs.
It isnot talus nor local slope wash accum-
ulating on its way down the hill.
Tho no erratics were found and
the structure is no longer exposed in the hiway gravel pit, the assoc-
iation of this gravel with the scabland is a clear genetic relationship
Perhaps by itself, it would not be convincing.
Theeastern side of
the coulee, however, has evidence of the same sort.
Back in a trib. valley is a large deposit of very angular, wholly
basaltic gravel, cobbles and boulders, located at the sharp turn in
Its summit is 345 fet above
the hiway by the well and camp place.
the coulee floor.
Its bedding, poorly shown in a hiway cut, is fore-
set withdip diagonally out toward the coulee.
There has been derange
ment of the trib's course in dissection of this fill and a small
narrows has resulted.
The deposit appears to have had fairly plane
surface originally.
There is no possibility of making this big deb-
ris accumulation a local affair.
Thefailure to find erratics is y
puz-ling but the marked scabland equally high on the west wall shows
what has occurred.
Below this deposit is another, or perhaps a lower part of the tr
higher one.
It has been opened for hiway gravel..
It is well
sorted but almost wholly angular, the degree of angularity very pro-
nounced.
Two foreign cobbles were found on the surface but none in
the cut.
Bedding shows rather poorly but in the back end of the cut
is definitely foreset up the Coulee.
Elsewhere, it is bedded parallel
to tles slope.
This deposit makes a convexity on the basalt slope, I00 feet from
bottom to top. It is a bar, as
It lies on ardadjacent to scablandknobs, here 30 ft
or so high.
surely as there are side-hill bars.
Its summit is 240 feet above the coulee floor.
Thegreat bar already known, on thawest side of the coulee, tra-
versed by a great loop of the hiway, measured 2I0 feet from bottom to
summit.
One erratic pebbles was found on it.
Its valleyward
face possesses greatflutings which are nearly horizontal.
They are
hot like terraces.
The upstream terminus of the bar descends
steeply toward the high rock cliff back of which the bar has been
deposited.
This looks like a constructional profile, as are the
flutings and as is the very clearly marked lee slope back into the
fOBS loses Colee here is 800 feet deep, if reckoned from the summit of
the hivay grade out to the west.
Most of this depth possesses
steep but graded slopes with all the markd of normal valley slopes.
Some structure may be involved but it does not show.
the precipitous
cliffs do not rise higher than the upper scabl and along the west side.
And the minor valleys which hang above the floor mouth at various
altitudes between very slight notches below the cliff summits and deep
cuts three fourths of the way down to the floor.
Howmuch of the of
original hang has been eliminated by subsequent downoutting isnt clear.


)How harmonize the hanging
valleys
Moses and Grand
coulees in In bacteia that will
I debeing
streams
during in verglacial time?
Can traft with Suake
M our canyon
le has ur hanging vallump


57
But whetleer themoses Coulee cliffs here are the result of deepening
or ofwiderd widening the preglecial valley, it isclear that enormous
erosion has occurred in the bottom of an oider valley, this erosion
producing a wide canyon with almost perpendiculer walls. .
It is
clear that as a closing phase of that erosion, or as a subsequent
episode, great gravel deposits have been made on the walls and along
the base of the walls of this youthful inner canyon.
Perhaps two
episodes of bar formation are involved, but each was tremendous and
no longinterval between is allowable, else the older higher bar gravel
would have suffered more erosion than the lower Wyouber bars.
Both
show but little, if any, , effects of run-off.
Should one argue that interglacial stream erosion did theeroding
of the inner canyon and that the graved was in some way a product of
glacial streams Of no excessive/volume, h¢must explein Douglas Coulee
to the west where there is no scabland, no bar gravel, no inner canyon
nothing but a mormal valley that falls far short of entering the gla-
cial stream canyon at grade.
Thisisimpossible to do and the co n-
ception of interglacial stream erosion producing the inner canyon of
Moses Coulee fails ompletely to fit the field evidence.
Another crossing of Woses Coulee was made a few miles south of
this, along the road from Farmer to Ephrata.
Here the floor is E
750 feet below the upland and 500 feet of this is preglacial, rather
probably structural in part.
Scabland extends
270 feet up from the
floor.
It marks a broad rock terrace on the west side here, presum-
ably a structural terrace, the floor of thebarliest valley here.
The scabland is excellently develdped, many striking buttes and knobs
interspersed among irregular channels and rock basins.
It is almost
identical with that on the floor of Grand Coulee immediately west of
Coulee City.
No one would question that as glacial river bottom,
because of the relation it has to Dry Falls.
Here, however, it is
250 feet above the coulee floor and might cause hesitation in accept-
ing as such.
River cobbles and small bars, which are present, shd
help to clear up the difficulty, tho some of the buttes are fully 50
feet high and completely isddated.
A great bar, probably at least 200 feet high, rests against the
canyon's west wall north of the road. Other large bars, associated
with a profusion of buttes and rock basins, lie up on this high rock
terrace east of the coulee floor.
Probably there is much more to
the bar deposits here back into Sage Brush Flat than previously
thought.
If what is gravel-covered is bar material thruout, with-
out rock knobs beneath, , the figure of 80 feet probably should be raised
to I00 feet thickness and the area covered should be quadrupled.
In
the absence of good sections and good evidence, however, this must
remain inferential.
The width of the upper and wider part of Moses Coulee at this cros-
sing is greater than any other place thruout the length of the coulee.
It iskefinitely due to structure and the broad rock terrace on which
scabland reaches its upper limit must mot be considered as necessarily
the preglacial valley floor.
Lower terraces, eroded on various flows,
may record the original preglacial floor, now greatly modified, but the
there is no way of establishing this except by a careful study of
trib. valleys.
The floor of Moses Coulee from Palisades down is bar-marked floor,
not a valley train floor.
Even the gravel deposit on the north
side at the uppermost orchards near Palisades, noted in I922, is a
bar.
volume of Wisconsin water, adequate forvalley train making,
came down Moses.


58
Columbia Valley, Wenatchee to Lake Chelan.
August 2 I929
Ixcept for two bar-mounded great terraces seen in I928, nothing in
the Columbia Valley along this stretch can be considered as having bar
forms.
The terrace remnants are not many and are all fairly defin-
ite terraces, without moundings or fosses.
But the situation igather disconcerting,
when one attempts to
interpret these deposits as Wisconsin er-e and earlier.
There is a
fairly continuous terrace or old valley floor, most of the way approz-
imately 50 feet above the river.
It is composed of rolled debris,
prevailingly coarse, and would do well for Wisconsin valley train .
But the mouth of Knapp Coulee, surely used by Wisconsin water out of
Take Chelan at the maximum of glaciation, has a slöping flat which is
farga-shangh above these terraces, above even the large I000 footterrace
on theeast side of the river here.
Its structure is not at a11
deltaic andindicates the presence if the main valley here either of
ice, against which it might have been deposited, or of a complete fill
The Columbia now is below 700 here and the brink
of the terrace in the mouth ofknepp is I240, 540 feet higher.
Can it
be possible that more than 550 feet of material has been removed here
since Wisconsin time?
Later_-It is possible, it isnecessary!
The great Terrace,
about five miles east of the lower end of LakeChelan, is 1210 A.I. and
there are remnants of other terraces 50 to 75 feet higher, not crossed
by the hiway.
South of the Columbia here, , the dopes at thislevel a
andigher are strewn with great "haystack" boulders, left by the Okan-
ogan lobe which also dammed Lake Chelan and forced Knapp Coulee to
operate.
TheWisconsin ice therefore is indicated and theGreat Terrace,
beinglower than and behind the moraine, islater Wisconsin, as Pardee
thot.
Now, outwash gravel at IRI0 on the Great Terrace, a little
later than the maximum glaciation and the operation of Knapp Coulee,
might well be a little lower than the Knapp Coulee terrace,
I2 miles
farther downstream but built at the maximum of the glaciation.
Thereturn trip to Wenatchee showed clearly that there exists a
perfectly adequate record of the largely eroded Wisconsin valley train
all theway.
A very large remnant, shown on theChelan sheet at two
levels, about I000 and about II00, lies on theeast side of the Columbia
opposite Knapp Coulee.
Another remnant, seen in I928X from the base
only, lies just east of the edge of the Chelan sheet along the south
side of the river.
Its altitude islessentially the same as that of
thegPeat Terrace.
Below a point three niles north of Intiat, the
ColumbiaValley narrows to about one third of its width wherdKnapp Coulee
enters and so continues almost to the junction of Wenatchee River, a
distance of I5 miles.
Due to this narrowness, most of the Wisconsin
vally train has been swept away here.
But from thewest side of the
valley, in the afternoon when the air isnot smoky or hazy, two or three
‡we remnants can be seen kept in view all the way.
here is a clear
descending gradient and there are only the faintest and most indefinite
suggestions of higher terraces.
Probably none of these are more than
slope wash forms.
Six miles below Orondo, on thawest side of the
Columbia, the hiway crosses a remnant which possesses two terrace tops
30
to 40 feet apart vertically, the higher one 744 ft A.T.
Levelling
from here adross the river at other terrace remnants on thebast side
of the I040 mid-valley butte shows them to be at the same level and a
little higher.
Two miles farther downstream, the terrace surface
seen on theeast side is lower andprobably a product of dissection of
the original fill.
In the latitude of Valleyview School, the orchards
grow up to theupper limit, or nearly so, of this sameterrace (the Wis-
consin valley train), here nearly 875 feet A.T.
Here is a very
extensive remnant, reaching along the river on to the Malaga aheet.


59
Thus in 35 miles, , from the western end of the Great Terrace to Valley
View School, thadescent of the Wisconsin valley train is 335 feet,
less than ten feet to the mile.
If, now, this interpretation of a Wisconsin valley train in Col-
umbie Valley is correct, It will be verified by tracing itfarther
downstream into the region where the Spokane Tiood waters poured into
the Columbia and built their greatbars.
Many places must be exam-
ined, especially the region of Gable Mountain, to settle the question
of the age of these great bars and channels.
Anotler test will
be a contrast in materials between the Wisconsin valley train, largely
of non basalt presumably, and Sokone gravels which should be dominant
ly of basalt.
No channelings no bars, in any way comparable to the Gable Min.
features, exist on the terraces here called Wisconsin.
This should
be alefinite characteristio for identification anddiscrimination if in
all cases there is also a vertical distribution of bar forms higher
than plane terrace tops.
What might be taken for an exception to this statement of plane-
ness of the Wisconsin valley train exists 8 miles of so east of Chelan
along the highway.
Here are ma'rked depressions, 20 to 40 or 50 feet
deep, in the terrace top.
They are close to some large granite hills
projecting out into, or isolated in, , the gravel plain.
In I925 (?)
they were taken for fosses.
They are, however, ice block holes,
incipient pitted plains.
The Okanogan moraine at Chelan overmode glacial lake silt and
crumpled it in large irregular folds.
The till, well exposed in a
blufs ofChelan River/ below the new dam, is much thicker shea down
valley and the foldings suggest that the movement was upvalley.
The
merked moraine hills lie just to the southeast, , farther down the
valey.
Furthermore, if this till were from the LakeChelan glacier,
there hrdly would heve been opportunity for a glacial lake to accum-
ulate tlese silts/ in front of it, while if the Okanogan glacier was
responsible, a lake in front of te advancing ice was unavoidable.
Add to this, Runner's discovery of basalt debris in the till,possible
only for the Okanogan lobe, and the case iscomplete.
Columbia Valley below Wenatchee
August 3 I929
The supposed landslide topography on the south side of the
valley east of the Wenatchee Leghts remnant of the Intiat surface,
is truly landslide.
limbed from Malaga to 2600 on Hardscrabble #
Hill.
Everything above the terrace on which the Malaga school stands
(760 AT.) islandslide topography.
A few granite boulders found on
the lower slopes, up to at least I300 ft A.T.
These may be foreign
or they may come from a concealed knob of granite beneath the basalt
and the sedimentary formaton which causes all the slipping.
Nothing
especially fresh in the slip forms shown.
ThoMalaga school terrace is composed of well-rolled cobbles and
pebbles.
Its structure iswest-eur not exposed.
Its surface ismost
curiously mounded into basins and hillocks thatlook very much like mor-
aine topography.
They surely are not slide topography.
The feat-
ures are not pronounced enough to show on the 25-foot contour interval
map•
They are apparently the same, however, as those on the terr-
ace overlooking Rock Island Repids, noted two or three years ago.
And they are identifiable as far west as teeterrace north of Mud Lake
and somelexist among the great slide blox of basalt south of the RR bai
bridge.
& In a pit north of Mud Lake, the reterial is rudely son-
ted and stratified and almost oll of well worn river cobbles and boul-
ders.
Besalt ispresent chiefly as boulders, tho not dominant among
then.
There is 'a clayey matrix but so little of it that the pebble
and cobbles ere all in contact.
Not a fragment was found with"


GO
V
definite glacial markings on it.
It seems impossible to call
this a glacial t111, yet 1Vseems impossible to call the mound-and-
basin topography anything else than moraine.
This samelopography is very prominent south of the Rapids,
ex-
tending over the ares between the road and the river.
Here its
local relief is 30 feet and its total over the terrace ranges thru at
least I00 feet.
South of this morainic-like topography is another
terrace, about 75 feet higher than the highest of the moraine-like
surface, without a trace of such features on its gentle slope or on it
flat top.
Sections here show the same composition and structure as
near Mud Lake.
It isuite the most pebbly till I have ever seen, if
it is till.
In the sections overlooking the Raids, this material
is about 20 to 30 feet maximum thickness and rests on a light-colored
silt whose thickness is not known but certainly 20 feet or so, perhaps
I00 feet.
These curious moraine-like forms cover these most of the terrace
south of the Rapids along the river for a mile and a half.
They all
occur in very good development on the east side of the river here, as
far south as the 925-foot mid-valley flat-topt gravel hill near
Columbia River Junctione
Here thay have a perfect morainic sur-
face, with short ridgings of variable shape and height and an abundance
of kettles (undrained) among them.
A local relief of 30 feet or
more exists.
But the na. tetial of these hillocks, so far as show on the surface
is 99.99% basalt.
Only six erratics were found by five of us in a
20/minute search.
In contrast, the material of these mounds south o
of the Rapids, west of the river, has a fair amount of non basalt and
tha tear lud Lake islergely non-basalt.
The altitude of the morainic" terrace remnants ranges from 750
to 875, consistently becoming higher farther down stream.
Consist-
ently, aloo, any neighboring terraces, either higher or lower, do not
possess these morainic features.
A very curious and susgestive
relationship seen at Malaga and at Mud Lake is the extension of the
gravelly debris up on the slopes of the landslide topography which
immediately overlooks them.
These are steer slopes, too.
It look
like a smearing such as till might leve; it doesnt look like river s
gravel habit.
The 925-foot terrace at the junction of Columbia and Moses Coulee
is 99.99% basalt.
Its western slope, like the western slope of the
morainic terrace just to the north, isstrewn with huge boulders of
basalt, haystack rocks probaby left by removal of finer debris but
possibly being a separate boulder deposit on the riverward scarp of
these terraces.
It seems impossible that they are stream-carried.
They are especially abundant approximately at the junction of Columbia
River and Moses Coulee dreek.
The surface of the 925-foot terrace is almost perfectly plane.
It isdust-covered to a depth of about three feet, below which there is
well-rolled coarse gravel, cobbles and boulders on the edge toward
the Columbia but only average gravel on the northern and eastern scarp.
This great accumulation of basalt gravel continues to be a puzzle.
And with the possibility, even the probability, that the irregular
topography on the 850-875 foot terrace to the north is moraine, the
problem isnt simplified.
One flew is that the mounded terrace top isground moraine, the se
scarp on the north of the 925-ft terrace is an ice-contact slope and
the 925-ft terrace is th remnant of an extraordinarily high valley /
train which buries completely any terminal moraine.
This view asks
for a valley glacier from Wenatchee or Columbia valleys, reaching
almost to the mouth of Moses Coulee.
It requires that the the upper


prit of the drift thus deposited be 99.99% basalt, tho it allows an
abundance of/non-basalt at Malage and lud Lake.
It requires that t
the outwash be 99.99% basalt also.
It ispobbible that as tle ice
tongue crossed into the valley with basalt cliffs, from Rock Island
Rapids down, it encountered so much 100se basalt gravel that this gave
the surficial high percent.
But to make the 925-ft terrace itseubwa
outwash and to have in It no non-basalt (five fragments of non-basalt
were found) seems impossible.
Another view admits the glacial origin of the mounded topography,
but denies any genetio relathn between mornine and the 925-terrace.
That terrace is considered as a remnant of a great fill made out in
ColumbinIRivor valley here by the seabland flood.
This fill was I00
feet higher than the floor of the coulee just within the coulee walls,
Воло іной о 101 . оно об дови іно поро1 8о р на ана в то доно й об баста
Coulee where this notable shallowing of the glacial stream is recorded
in a nearly complete bar about 200 feet higher than the lake surface.
After cessation of the glacial discharge, the Columbia crossed the bar
two places, thqvestern channel later getting the upperhand and secur-
ing the-water all the water.
Thus the island-like position of
the terrace and the steep scarp facing north and east.
It ismuch more
like a stream-cut scarp than like an ice-contact slope.
Themoraine
is later and the ice stopped at the scarp base here.
Two accessory features of the Columbia Valley lend color to the
second interpretation.
One isthe existence, on the west side of
the river, just north of the mouth of Dry Gulch, of a terrace at I000,
a terrace whose surface definitely descends up the Columbia.
this should prove to be 99% basalt, its debris will be a Moses Coulee
deposit, not a Columbia River deposit.
Its slope then will be easily
explicable as the descending grade of the big valley-mouth bar, of
which the 925-terrace is the chief remnant.
Also thebar in the mouth
ofColocham. noted last year, will do as well as a remnant of this hypo-
thetical coulee-mouth bar as it will fit the interpretation of last
summer•
Colocham
lIven better, for as% a local unit bar,
this deposit in
has dips down theColumbia, and there now appears to have been
no spill down this part of
the river
Theother feature is show in the cut east of Rock Islandhapids
where the hiway climbs to the terrace with morainic topography.
The
cut shows much silt and fine sand and two members of fine gravel.
The
gravel is wholly basalt and wholly angular, blades and splinters being
common forms.
This composition islimpossible for a fine gravel of
Columbia River, for the river enters the basalt only a mile a nada
half upstream from this deposit.
In contrast, the composition of
the I256 Liberty School bar-terrace is am almost an arkose, there is
Go much granitic debris in it.
Theliberty School deposit is normal,
so tar as composition goes, the hiwgy cut material is impossible mater-
ial from upvalley.
It must have come from the scablands and Moses
Coulee isright at hand, only two miles farther down the Columbia.
Furthermore, this black gravel is highly angular, with an abundance
of chips, splinters and slivers and a few broken-rounds.
It must be
a product of the tremendous battering dup Moses Coulee that is recorded
also in the Three Divels cataract.
By this second view, which separates moraine and terrace as of
different episodes, theice tongue is subsequent to the Spokane Flood.
Indeed, the morainic topogrophy directly overlies the stratified
fine gravel, sand and silt, this fine material thus representing the
up-velley deposit out of Moses.
This ispnly two miles up valley,
2
very short distance compared with the Snake Valley backwash.
of wurse, a glacial Columbia was flowing at the time, even itho flood


62
came down it, and the glacial silt, finer than any loess apparently,
and also coldoidal, was from this source, settling in the pond made
by the Moses Coulee bar.
Thisidea of a Moses Coulee bar seems a fea-
sible way to get ponding in the Columbia below the end of the ice
which discharged tie turbid water.
Yet there are features of the silt which may wreck this idea. It
possesses what look like drying craoks along certain strata and there
are paper-thin layers that seem impregnated with organic matter, also
others that have dendritio markings that may be organic.
These silts
must be studied further.
Columbia Valley about Wenatchee
August 4
T929
The case for morainic origin of the suspected topography noted
yesterday is now fairly complete.
Malaga gives te clue.
The
gravel extends up on the landsidp topography to the south I25 feet
higher than the Malaga school terrace.
It ishere simply a venarr
or smear on the mixed basalt and shale of the slide.
In one place,
nearly half way between Mud Lake and Malaga, it isheaped up in a good
lateral moraine ridge, the northern slope of which bears the glaciat
hummocky topography of the gravel and the southern slope below the rid
ridge is simply the local slide material.
The composition of the gwound moraine changes greatly with ref-
erence to some huge slide blocks of basalt near the GRR bridge. The
largest of these blocks stands 975 ft. A.I., 375 feet above the river
at the north.
West of these hills (upstream) the gravelly till is
35% basalt (north of Mud Lake) and 29% basalt (Malaga school) •
Immed.-
iately east, or downstream from the hills, the humnocks and hills are
covered with large angular blocks of basalt and near the Valhalla school
the debris in the hummocks is 86% basalt.
This seems to explain the
low percentage of non-basalt in the moraine east of the Columbia and
north of the 925 bar-terrace.
The case for a Moses Coulee bar completely across the Columbia
seems fairly well established by two more observations today.
One is
the character and composition of the Colocham Creek mouth bar.
It is
from 90% to 99% basalt, very anguler, almost no rounded pebbles except
non-basalt.
Broken rounds are common, splinters, slivers and chips
especially are common.
This with the bedding which dipps back into
the creek valley and the aberrant composition for any gravel down the
Columbia shows that the bar idea is at least justifiable.
The other observation was made at the mouth of Dry Gulch, oppo-
site Columbia River station.
a pit in the terrace here
(noted yesterday) shows 90% to 99% basalt gravel, very poorly worn,
with poorly shown foresets dipping westward out of the Columbia and
toward the western valley wall.
This fits in perfectly with the
idea.
Add to this that there is a higher terrace here, about I2000
ft. A.I., on the south sie of the gulch mouth.
It was not visited
but at its altitude on the north side of the gulch, the material is
distinctly arkosic, like the Liberty School bar-terrace, and therefore
normal stream waste for th Columbia Valley here.
If thee I020 gravel
be called Columbia River debris, it must be similar to that higher.
It is, however, almost all basalt, an abnormality that needs a special
explonation.
If error hasp been made in interpreting this sag and swell gravel
between Wenatchee and Rock IslandRapids as moraine, it can only be
bar-covered-shaped river gravel and' as such, it will be found farther
dovn the Columbia.
If morainic, it will have a definite down-valley
limit.
Thislimit appears to be approximately at Columbia River
station and the' 925-foot bar-terrace.


&3
Whether the ice tongue come from the Columbia or Wenatchee valley
isnt known.
Traced upstream from Rock Island, the Wisconsin valley
train rises relative to tle moraine and probably buried whaterer.
moraine there might have been farther upstream.
Thus it is either
still buried or has been destroyed in the erosion of those parts of
the valley train which have gone.
gravel and sand at about 1200 ft. A.T.
largely unworn, tho
some well rolled fragments are present.
Basalt present but for
from dominant.
This isanother remnant of the high-level arkose
gravel and sand, older than any other deposits (thus far found) in
ColumbiaValley.
found this season (?))
Wenatchee River has a gravel-confined narrows just above the hi-
way bridge that is unusual.
The gravel is obviously Wisconsin valley
train andhas foresets dipping up the W natchee.
This gravel does nö
extend far up the valley, grading in a mile or two into sand and then
into fine Band.
No true glacial silt seen in the sections tho if the
Wisconsin valley train of the Columbia blocked the Wenatchee there shd
be a silt deposit upstream.
A feature of the lower slopes of the valley at Wenatchee and
down valley as far as lud Lake, below the level of the Wisconsin
valley train, is the profusion of huge boulders of gneiss, some of
them almost as large as a small shack.
Teey cease abruptly down
valley at a ridge composed of tjem, lying diagonably to the valley
length, near the niway near Mud Lake and lower than the moraine ter-
ace.
They may record a tongue of ice down the Columbia but if so
that tongue musthave been pre-Wisconsin.
It may antedate the
morainic terrace also, the boulders being buried at the time the mor-
inic terrace was formed and being left later by river erosion which
removed the overvurden and left the larger boulders.
They may, how
ever, post-date the morainic terrace.
They seem far too numerous
and far too large for any river work.
Their abrupt termination
down-valley suggests ice deposition.
no trace of the morainic terrace seen up the Wenatchee as far as
Cashmere.
The supposed bar in the mouth of the hanging valley just east
of Rock Island Creek is not a bar.
It has a terrace top, not a fosse
back of it.
Seen from well up on the slopes at the mouth of Dry
Gulch.
Its altitude is about I300, or a little less, , and it should
So difficult to
setons to the liberty no hoot be steamace den eat Lini difficult to
disposal.
Wenatchee to Trinidad
August5% I929
Another puzzle solved this mornngg.
Thefiberty School bar-
terrace is a compound form of moraine and outwash.
his fact came
to light from a traverse on foot from the east-west road arross it south
to the hivay, traversingsections I6 and 2I.
The surface along this
traverse is diversified With hills and sags, some of them undrained
depressions, amounting to 30 feet or more in local relief.
One hill,
on the east edge of the Wenatchee sheet (west edge of the Malaga?)
along the road is 90 feet high on its west slope.
The topography looks as morainic as anything except linear ridges
of drift.
That it is not sand dune toppgraphy is obvious from the
material; fine gravel mostly but containing many cobbles and even some
boulders on the lower southern slope.
It istrue that clean well-
sorted gravel isnt a likely composition for till but other features me
make the case clear.
One thing is the fact that the southern slope
carries several ridges parallel with the slope, as irregular in character
wAs 9nYn typical moraine ridges and enclosing undrained linear sags


69
among them.
The maximum relief of the most pronounced ridge
and the associated bag on the uphill side of it 1f (the north side)
is I25 feet.
These morainic forms continue down the south slope of the deposit
below the level of the lteral moraine southwest of Malaga.
Gullies
have modified the glacial topography somewhat but it is still very
definite and clear.
By tracing it down the irregubr part of the
southern slope and by finding it more gravelly, , cobbly and bouldery
at lower altitudes, , its oneness with the morainic terrace at Malaga
and the lateral moraine just/to the south is clear.
The Liberty
School terrace, at least in its western morainic part, becomes a part
of the record of this maximum glaciati on of Columbia Valley.
The steep slope in theeastern end of the deposit has been pro-
duced by underoutting of the Columbia.
Phi shas destroyed the mor-
ainic topography that originally lay here and that carried the ice
contact slope all the way from bottom to top.
Thus the back slope of theliberty school bar-terrace becomes
the
outwash slope along the side of tle ice tongue.
Water from this app-
arently escaped eastward between ice and rock wall to the termination
of the moraine near Columbia River station.
The Valley View bar musthe similarly of this genesis tho it was
not visited this season.
Perhaps its morainic valleyward slope has
ben completely destroyed.
The great basalt boulder on its slope now
can be explained as ice-carried.
A puzzle still remaining is its
composition.
Why should moraine be so well sorted and so free from
clay?
Why should its higher lateral part be fine and its lower
mid-valley portions be gravel?
The bar in the mouth of Rock Island Creek valley is almost wholly
of very angular local basalt but contains pebbles, cobbles and boulders
of non-basalt.
ly granitic waste.
It also contains finer interstitial material, chief-
It ishere considered as a remnant of a lateral
moraine of this maximum glaciation.
Its summit is/somewhat above
A IIOOfeet A.I.
The silt and black sand in the highway cut east of Rock Island
Rapids was re-examined.
The suppdsed mud cracks are simply the pro-
duct of dessication in the face of the cliff.
Tho well marked for
a few inches back in the silt, they become fewer and less definite
until, three feet back,, the same layers that carry them in the face are
totally lacking in them.
This is a pseudo-drying crack phenomenon
that is worthy of note.
Pebbles of peaty material, very friable but with definite rolled
shapes, found in one member of the black fine gravel.
-They appear to
record an older swamp deposit, torn up by the scabland = waters some-
where in Moses Coulee or nearer to tke place of deposition.
Much
clay in some of the peat, some pebbles more clay than peat.
Sections in the east edge and south end of the 925 ft.bar-terrace
examined along the Mansfield branch of the GRR and the present big
gully for flood water out of Moses Coulee.
There is no varved clay
and no sand or fine gravel in the sections.
In one cut along the
wash, fine sand or coarse loess overlies the gravel of the section but
it is wind-blown, as amply attested by the numerous calcareous root
casts/ in it at all levels.
Elsewhere, all cuts and exposures show
only basalt gravel, some of it fairly well worn tho not rounded and all
of it poorly sorted and poorly stratified.
Thestratification in the
PR out thru the south end of the bar-terrace isforeset, tho not in the
long deltaic style, and the foresets dip westward diagonally avay from
Moses Coulee and toward the west wall of Columbia River Valley.
This
Location is two thirds of the way pershyally the rest wall of the columbid:


and, wine distantly,
how
Ни
Liberty, Sahaul outwash.
The material
might be considered
flat boulders indic
sets and one large
drilled into and ac
therefore indubitab
The material in
not Columbia River
Moses Coulee, there
These seem most pro
the north end offthe
lacking in foreign
tic material is a c
certainly very limi
in it.
The high terra
the Malaga sheet (9
Coulee river.
nant.
Indeed, if
from Moses Coulee,
from top of/one bar
This slope 'is compas
north of Dry Gulch 1
wholly of basalt gre
These great mas
their surface profil
terrace relations ar
explained as Columbi
to correlate them,
Moses Conlee deposit
successive normal gl
its material would
k
debris coming in sir
the Columbia, it wou
would not possess fo
agree with any of
deposit.
The contained b
large for a stream t
for the "haystack" r
ing the RR tracks al
contains such fragme
by the RR bridge nea
of haystack boulders
future as is has bee
on the Okanogan Plat
blocks or stream-rol
The silt and fi
buried by moraine.
ified deposit is tha
against the moraine
comes down to the si
across on to it.
in its Columbia Rive
extends.
Theblu
half of one percent
The silt and sand ma
this isnt demonstrab


65
The material in these outs is so dirty and poorly washed that it
might be considered a till.
But the tilted position of many of the
flat boulders indicates current in the same direction as do the fore-
sets and one large boulder was seen with potholes and channelways
drilled into and across It, still in place up in the deposit.
It is
therefore indubitably a river deposit.
Thematerial in these outs is almost 99% basalt.
It therefore is
not Columbia River gravel.
But along the present dischargeway from
loses Coulee, there are numerous foreign cobbles and Wallpth pebbles.
These seem most probably to have come as outwash from the more ne at 7
the north end offthe 925 bar-terraces
Moses Coulee bars are notably
lacking in foreign material.
Another view would be that this erra-
tio material is a contribution from theVisconsin ice whose outwash was
certainly very limited but certainly has plenty of foreign material
in it.
The high terrace traversed by the hiway just on the south edge of
the Malage sheet (994 on map) seems to be a bar of the scabband Moses
Coulee river.
'Its altitude is but little above the mid-valley rem-
nent.
Indeed, if one were to fill up the deep gully now discharging
from Moses Coulee, there would remain a sooth flowing surface across
from top offone bar and dow its slope to the slope and top of the other
This slope is comparable to the up-Columbia descent of the bar remnant
north of Dry Gulch mouth.
Both bar-terraces are composed almost
wholly of basalt gravel.
These great masses of 99% basalt gravel in Columbia River Valley,
their surface profiles flowing imme one into another, , their lack of
terrace relations and theft foresets across the Columbia can not be
explained as Columbia River gravel.
There are no forms with which
to correlate them, farther upstream, anyway.
Here is an undeniable
Moses Conlee deposit.
It was made either by a Spokane Flood or by
successive normal glacial discharges thru Moses Coulee.
If the latter,
its material would be mingled, during deposition, with Columbia River
debris coming in simultaneously, it would have correlatives upstream in
the Columbia, it would have terrace (rather than bar) profiles. it
would not possess foresets dipping across the Conimbia.
It does not
agree with any of these feattres.
It is a splendid Spokane Flood
deposit.
The contained boulders of this 925 ft bar-terrace are tremendously
large for a stream to transport.
They seem to have been the source
for the "haystack" rocks that strew the bluff of the Columbia overlook-
ing the PR tracks along the river.
The till and moraine does not
contains such fragments, even to the lee of the big slidepblock hills
by the RR bridge near Malaga.
This means, then, that the occurrence
of haystack boulders along the Columbia will be interpreted in the
future as is has been in the past.
They signify glaciation only up
on the Okanogan Plateau.
Elsewhere, they may be gravity-rolled
blocks or stream-rolled.
The silt and fine sand of the hiway cut near Rock Island is not
buried by moraine.
The topographic expression of the depesis strat-
ified deposit is that of a terrace (with some dunes lying on it) lying
against the moraine and 30 to 40 feet lower.
Themoraine topography
comes down to the silt and sand deposit's terrace but does not ontinue
across on to it.
And it is not possible to trace the silt and sand
in its Columbia. River bluff any farther south than the terrace top
extends.
Thebluff capped by moraine is heavily gravel-covered,
helf of one percent being freign, near the silt and sand terrace.
The silt and sand may be back of
this isnt demonstrable.
this gravel, beneath the moraine,


66
The silt andsand may well be interpreted as younger than moraine
and as lying against a steeper slope of that moraine.
The 925 ft
bar-terrace is obviously either of the same age as the glaciation or
is older.
At any rate, this interpretation wont allow the silt and
sand to be correlated with the 925ft bar-terrace.
That interpre-
tation seems pobbible only if the silt and sand goes under the moraine,
This is the relation in the blurf directly south of the Rapids but it
might be that the two silts are not of the same age or that thee two
moraines (on north and on south sides of the Columbia) are not.
The high bar north of Trinidad seems clearly to be shaped correct-
ly for such a feature.
It has a definite, , tho shallow, fosse on the
west.
Andits material consists of mingled basalt and granite, very
fine gravel to sand.
It may not be a Scablandbar.
It may belong to
an earlier series.
The composition gives no clue.
But it cannot
be correlated with the Liberty School bar-terrace for that is related
to tle moraine and is therefore Gounger then scabland bars.
This assertion brings up an interesting question.
Where isthe
outwash of the maximum glaciation, south of the moraine?
It should
be present in some of the terraces between the 925 ft bar-terrace and
Trinidad.
It should be lower than scabl and bar gravel and higher
than Wisconsin valley train terraces.
Is it possible to make the glaciaton and the scabland contempor-
aneous?
The abrupt termination of moraine against the 925 ft bar
terrace is very suggestive.
Vicinity of Trinidad
August 6
I929
The Trinidad terrace, which continues back up the Willow Springs
Draw, is a product of the Crater Cataract discharge.
Its ranterial
isgravel with much coarse material in it.
Thegravel is all basalt.
The terrace is sharply marked off from the much higher coarse sand and
fine gravel deposits immediately north of Trinidad and thence westwad
for three miles.
Its debris is altogether too coarse to have come
past the lodgngg place of all this sand, unless it is an affair of a
later episode and there are no correlative terraces at its level or to
agree with any gradient it might have had.
Indeed, there are no
terraces at all up the Columbia for miles, tho great quantities of sand
and gravel lie here, from II00 to I300 ft AT. down to river level.
The functioning ofCrater cataract, therefore, did not occur when
the great bars were built for they are as high as the highest scabland
on thee basalt bench between Trinidad and The Potholes, ands high as
the head of Crater channel out of Quincy Basin.
Yet both are the pro-
duct of glacial waters of great volume.
How o make thesequence has
been for long a puzzle.
Now a light has burst thru the darkness and
all the new data of this summer are going to be fitted togehter with-
out disharmonies, I believe.
First, however, a bit of description.
The gravel along the north side of the east-west stretch of Colum-
bia River between Cape Horn and Trinidad nowhere has terrace shapes #
thoush itanges fromriver level (550) up to II00, two and a fourth
miles straight west of Trinidad and south of thehiway.
That itlis a
now in original bar form, except for the perfedtly obvious sullying,
shown in the two big RR gravel pits along the GNPR .
the east end, just north of the lone ranch west of
One pit is at
Trinidad, the other
is a mile fartler west at the south tip of the II00 foot isolated port-
ion of the gravel fill.
In the western pit, thebections extend from 750, the IR level,
up almost or quite to I000 AT.
worn but fairly well sorted basalt gravel.
Thruout, the material is poorly wo
Thruout, the bedding


67
dips down to the west, directly up the Columbis and exactly parallel
to to the upstream sTope of the bar Itself.
In several places, there
are foresets in these dipping beds and the foresets dip east, againtt
the dip of the gravel as a whole.
If there is anythingthat can
prove to a hard-boiled critic that these great mounds are bars, this
should do it.
The current which built the bar moved east, the
material comine down from Moses Coulee.
Yet the aggradation on the
upstream face of the bar put 200 feet or more of grovel on it vith
dip conformable to the upstream bar face.
Up thisface, , the aurrent
moved and locally was able to make foresets showing by their dip, their
gradation of material andtheir decreasing amount of dip toward the loW-
er ends of lamina that the debris added to this slope was moved here
along and up a subfluvial slope.
A river adequate to do this trans-
porting, yet500 feet deep, was-great-anough- isthus recorded.
Its
central current was great enough, after bar accumulation had filled
the slacker places, to keep the channel from filling.
A cut along the hiway at the north end of this II00 bar summit
shows I00% basalt gravel, poorly worn, with foresets dipping west,
not east.
Thismust have occurred in an eddy, which the configur-
ation of the valley favors.
The eastern gravel pit shows only coarse sand and fine gravel,
very well stratified and sorted, with beds in the east end of the cut
dipping exactly parallel with the slope toward thepast, toward the face
of Trinidad terrace.
No current foresets in this; its more like
delta foresets.
It isthe lee face of the side-hill bar, structurally
and texturally andtopographically.
Intenmediate sections, poor
ones, show only horizontal or nearly horizontal bedding.)
There is
no interpretation, other than the one used here, which will account
for these features and relations.
West Bay with its great ripple-mark-like hills may well be the
bed of the gigantidtorrent.
It is 750 to 800 ft A.T., as high as
the base of these sections west of Trinidad.
The structure of theTrinidad terrace does not indicate any delta
here and sections go from top to bottom.
It appears more like a
deposit in a rising river, perhaps an aggrading river.
It also has
a suggestion of bar form, for its outer edge is 20 feet or so higher +
than the portion crossed by the hiway.
With apologies to those who do not believe in a Spokane Flood,
I regret to announce that there probably were two of them.
The first
was thereatflood which laid out the entire pattern of scabland chan-
nels and which did all the work in the Telford and Cheney tracts and
down the Snake and back up the Snake and all the eastern tributarsval-
leys.
This flood deepened Grand Coulee sufficiently #e more than
any other spillway so that when, probably after an interglacial interval
had passed and another glaciation advanedd and started to retreat,
Grand Coulee got all of it.
Missoula, probably.
"It" was the bursting of a glacial Lake
flood,
Quincy Basin then may have had its greatest
It was this second flood which made the
Less in volume than the first.
or this second flood may have begusting in Yorumo vase. was dOnE.
ing down Moses ancho water was coming, into the Columbia by way of the
Snake and Esquatzel (No glacial water)
There was then no ponding
or overfilling except from the three cataracts and Lower Crab Creek.
On second thot, this couldnt have been so big a burst or, no matter
what by what routes, the Columbia would have been filled with the some
enormous volume that is recorded in the bars, and therefore, even tho
no bars were formed in th channels not in use, the Trinidad terrace
and the three cataracts and Lower Crab Creek channel could not be
formed.


66
Another difficulty with the new form of the hypothesis is to
leave the moraine on Rathdrum Prairie uneroded by the second flood.
It can be dodged in three ways.
I- Ice still lingered in the Prairie
valley and covered the moraine, the burst escaping over it.
2- the so-called Wisconsin channel
is the route by which the second flood crossed the prairie.
3- The water did cross the prairie
and its moraine, and the subdued character of the moraine is a onse-
quence of that crossing.
It may be that the seoond burst, lor al1 these are postulated on
the bursting offake Missoula,) occurred when thelice covered moraine in
all cases.
No, this wont vork.
Ice must be out of the Spokane
Valley and the Columbia Valley as far west as the head of Grand Coulee.
If it be kept that far back on the north edge of the plateau, it must
be equally far back on Post Falls-Rathdrun Prairie moraine.
Idea No
Onemust be discarded at once.
Another idea that may be used to explain the cataract development
after the bar-building and scabland development making in Columbia Val-
ley west of the plateau is as follows.
there was but one flood, •
one burst.
This laid out the scabland pattern and all accessory feat-
ures except the cataracts.
It out Grand Coulee deeper than any other
channels.
Then, with the waning of the ice sheet, the discharge
from ordinary melting of theCordilleran icesheet used tie coulee, and
if voluminous enough could develop thecataracts, , the Trinidad terrace
and the lower Crab Creek scabland.
Thishypothesis demand's a very
great volume, indeed, but it avoids tampering with Rathdrum Prairie
for all th moraine on scabland and on bar deposits is younger and unas
associated with any flood.
Howto avoid a flood during the later
glaciation is a puzzle, however, for sinee this this is the most advan-
ced moraine everywhere except on the plateau west of Grand Coulee, its
ice most surely wuld make another Lake Missoula.
A test of the two-flood idea has been suggested in #iternative
deposits of the entrance of Crab Creek and Washtuna Coulee.
data at that time did not seem to indicate a sequence byt the vicinity
of Adrian may show that the big bar nearly across Crab there is not =
Wisconsin in age, but second flood.
Vantage to Filensburg
6 I929
Both the Saddle Mts and Frenchman Hills anticlines rise to consid-
erably greater elevations west of the Columbia.
The hivay crosses
fron Vantage to Ellensburg along the structural sag between them.
Both anticlines die out on thebastern margin of thatSlensburg struct-
ural valley.
Ihchorthernmost range of theseveral crossed by the
river (Yakima) between Ellensburg and Yakima is apparently the Priest
Rapids Range.
Gravel terrace overlooking thellleysburg flat from theeast is
composed of yellowish dirty-looking decayed material.
any scabland gravel.
Far older than
Ellensburg to Yakima
Aug. 6 I929
The tortous sourse-of-the canyon of the river should possess
forms simulating scabland , if any normally eroded canyons should.
Instead, it walls are largely debris-covered and grassed and there are
no suggestions of trenched spur buttes, side-hill gasshes, scabby cliff
or bar deposits.
Also the gravel which lies in the canyon and which
is cut here and there by the hiway grade isgenerally stained and weath-
ered down almost to river level.
as fresh as the scabland gravel.
Nothing much above the river looks


vole. ash
69
Glacial Silts in Yalima Valley
Aug. 7
I929
They are here!
And they are exactly like the silts ofWalla Wall
And they occur up to about the same upper
limits.
he hiway along the nortlern edse ofthe valley, parallel-
ing the Over, has dozens of outs betweon Union Gap and Zillah, in which
these silts are exposed.
Ilxposures the tolmondos range Ap to 35 feet in
thickness, the substratum being well-worn, somewhat consolidated, un-
stained river gravel.
The material might be taken from the exposures east of the Colum-
bia, they are so nearly the same in every respect.
Even to the
contained scratohed, bruised and striated cobbles, the irfogular pock-
ets of tiny pebbles and coarse grains, the curfature of the bedding to
conform to the cross-sectional profiles of the spurs, and the clastic
dikes.
There is good stratification, tho it is of the irregular
type in Walla Walla valley and Snake River tributaries.
Fine sand
srades upward rather abruptly into a silt with indistinct lamination.
The average thickess of these coupes is about a foot.
Nothing like
the lamination of theverved silts in the hiway cut east of Rock Island
Rapids.
Some of the ouples are triples, with pebbly sand beneath
the fine clean sand.
These pebbly sand members are variable in thick-
ness along any one layer, jet they are surprisingly persistent.
Little of the irregular and separate pockets of such material was seen,
No organic traces of any kind.
This undoubted slacial gilt constitutes a definite terrace along
the valley.
Its surface is rolling and seems to constitute a drainage
pattern dissected out of it subsequent to deposition.
The upper limits of this silt not yet clearly deciphered.
A peb-
bly silt, poorly shown in a shallowsection two miles west of Yakima
at I200 A.T. may belong here but there was nothingelse seen on the
whole Yakima plain to be correlated with it.
North of Zillah, the
silt coverd the dissected terrace up to about 950 A.T.
It should
extend considerably farther but there were no adequate sections to show.
Yakima Valley contains a lower terrace, shown as far up at least
as Granger.
Thisterrace is well seen as distinct from the present
flood plain between Granger and Sunnyside, along the south side of
Snipes Mtn.
A pit at the brick plant in Granger
• opened in the
terrace, shows 45 fest of well stratified sand and silt, , looking much
like the glacial silt and sand, but lacking the irregularities of
stratification, the evidences of settling and squeezing, the glaciated
pebbles (even any isolated pebbles) and the weird marked couples of
sand beneath silt.
which are lacking in the glacial silt.
On the other hand, it possesses certain features
It has amarked white layer,
three inches in average thickness, I5 feet or so from the top, an excel-
lent worker thruout the pit. It has a few calcified plant stems or
roots well down in it, andit yielded the horns of a bison a few days
ago and a scapula and antler a year or so ago.
These fossils were
found 40 to 45 feet below the level terrace top of thedeposit.
Tho there are a few layers which consist of a pebbly silt, there
is no close similarity between these and thepebbly layers and pockets
in the glacial silt.
Moreover, , this deposit is strictly limited
vertically, not going above thee top of the terrace while the glacial
silt in characteristic plase lies much higher.


70
Vicinity of Sunnyside and Mabton
Aug. 8
I929
The case for the glacial flood silt ient as clear now as it
seemed yesterday.
There are two terraces above the floodplain level
and the glacial silt, so-called, lies higher than both or is thehigher
and undulatory upper continuation of the higher terrace.
relations are best been along the south side of Snipes Mountain, near
the extreme western end of the irrigation ditch that leads westward
past Baird from the vicinity of Sunnyside.
The vertical intervals separating river from lower terrace and
separating the two terraces and the tops of the undulatory broad ridges
8 of the glacial silt in all cases altpbout 30 feet.
Sections in
each are good.
There is much thats similar in all.
The characters
seem in general to be those of floodplain deposits, with suggestions
of local vigorous currents tho nothing more than seams or lenses or
short thin strata of cravel occur.
All three contain each a layer
ef-relearie-ask.-----the- ofwhite,
probably either a diatomaceous earth or a layer of volcanic ash.
extent and persistence of each suggests ash.
The layer in the lower
member can be traced along the gully cut by the irrigation ditch spill
wast as far as the lower terrace extends back from theftream. Here it
ends tho an excellent cut continues for a I000 feet farther.
In this
cut, whichis in the higher terrace, another layer of the white ash
appears, 25 to 30 feet higher and not far from the same depth below the
surface, 5 or 6 feet.
The first layer is 6 inches to a foot thick,
that in the higher terrace isless-chen- 6 inches or less and is defin-
itely andpersistently double, a thin layer of clay or fine sandying
in the middle.
This double layer, traced farther back from the river,
continues parallel with the surface of the terrace to the end of the
section.
The section fails to intersect the rounded ridges of the
glacial silt.
In the road cuts thru this silt, a white layer, , also
double tho more irregular than that of the upper terrace, is present
almost everywhere about 3 or 4 feet below the surface.
Like all the
irregular bedding of this higher deposit, the white layer conforms to
the slopes of the rounded ridges.
This feature was a notable thing in the Pataha Creek sections seen
last year the rounded ridges with bedding conforming to their profile
It must mean something.
It seems to record either deposition in
mounds and ridges or a very uniform settling and slumping as valleys
developed in the surface of an originally even surfaced fill.
latter view requires the sags to be stream valleys and their minor
The
size means that they must be only wet weather drainways.
That such
should develop to the breadth and Wentleness of slope these all possess
seems very improbable here.
There is no drainage to day in tam.
It ishot clear that they constitute a drainage pattern.
the second hypothesis must be discarded.
If not, then
If, then, these mounded forms and structures record uneven depos-
a cause for such must be found.
It does not appear to be irre-
itionity of the underlying surface for severed outs shot the underlyIng
Satsop-Hood River-Ellensburg gravel to have original surfaces beneath
the silt quite at variance with the surface expression of the silt
itself.
Is the gep in tracing the double white silt leyer from the upper
terrace to the mounded glacial silt could be bridged, it could be Inown
whether or not they are the same or are two different layers.
they are the same is possible, for the white layer of themounded silt
That
comes lower out toward the tips and lower ends of these rounded low
hills andhillocks.
re-appear in the silt in the upper terrace.
Across thegap, it might actually dip down to
Iculties for other features of the sections at the two levels differ
Yet this idea finds diff-


7/
rather notably.
The terrace sections show strata and lenses of
the mound sections do not.
The terrace sections do not
show a coupled relationship of sand up into silt or clay, the mound
sections do.
the mound sections show much of the pebbly slt or
sand with good and fairly uniform distribution of the o arse grains
while neitler of the terraces show this development tho they do poss-
ess a pebbly silt or sand in sone places.
The mound sections have
embedded pebbles, cobbles andeven small boulders in the silt and the
sand, obviously dropped from floating ice, theterrace sections do not
show this.
beth-termages-wessess-whew.. It is not difficult to find scratches
and bruises on these pebbles and cobbles.
Tho none found are real-
be explained in any other way.
58 800d gases of glacial lening and grooming the onE 004 103 800t
casts, the sections in both terraces possess them.
There seem, then, to be three deposits of Pleistocene age in
the YakimaValley ef-easte south of Snipes Mitn.
The oldest and upper
most of them came from glacial water, the other two are of later and
different origin, being essentially floodplain deposits.
This in-
terpretation requires either a considerable valleyward dope of the
surface of the glacial silt, on the lover parts of which the upper
terrace rests, or else a time of erosion of the glacial silt, to be
followed later by aggradation.
The two terraces see/mclearly
to require a period of erosion for their relations, tho no unconfor-
mity shows in the fairly good section.
Another section, forgotten when the above pages were written, was
found about at the base of the mounded silt, at contact with the upper
margin of thehigher terrace.
In it, thewhite layer of the mound silt
ended on one side of the gully, the opposite side la part of the upper
terrace) not possessing it.
This seems to show that there are two
double layers, one in the mounded silt, one in the upper terrace.
A discovery of mammalian bones in the upper three feet of one
section in the mounded silt is of significance.
These gones are
very fragile and not of any domestic animal.
Not sure what they
belong to.
Scattered along about the same level.
They seem to
lie under a blanket of wind-deposited re-worked silt.
Nothing like
the characteristic features of the glacial silt was found at their
level or above.
Butlif they really PR belong to the so-called gla-
cial silt, we must stop calling it glacial.
How ice-marked stones
dropped into silt ould harmonize with mammalian bones is difficult to
see.
It ishuch more likely that this herbivore (persumaby) "wander-
ed' thru the Yakima. Valley when thefterraces were being deposited.
His remains, unlike the bison horn cores, were buried in wind-drift up
on the dopes above the flood-plain level,
Anent the old Satsop problem, I am probably wrong.
points out,
As Buwalda
there is re-arranged quartzite gravel in these terraces
and in slope wash and this I took in somesection to be the original
bedding, unconformable on the tilted Ellensburg ashy shale.
The sec-
tion that convinces me that a gravelly member, highly quartzitic, lies
in the Bllensburg is about three or four miles north of zillah.
Here
the gravel isrder at least 50 feet of Ellensburg ash and is tilted at
the samdangle.
Workmen report thatthe mastodon found at Granger about I920 came
from the bottom of thepastern upper pit wwich is entirely in the
Ellensburg shale.
What does Buwalda say about it?


72
EPPI
South of
Matton along thehiway to Bickleton, various fresh
glacial erratics wore round up to 1040 and afon a little higher.
Some of these are striated. Some 100k like theBelt argillites.
At
940 a patch of/abouttwo dozen frasments offthe granodiorite porphyry,
associated with several other kinds of non-basalt, was found. Like
thegraonodioritein several other places in the record of the Spokane
Ilood, the patch seems to have come from the breaking up of one origin-
31 boulder.
Itmay represent the fracturing of two to several boul-
ders, however.
Andthoranodiorite was also found east of Sunnyside
al ut 6 miles, on the road to Mountain View school.
Here it occurs
at the upper limit of all erratics,
, II0 ft A.T., associated with
several other kinds of rock.
Upper limit of erratics north of Prosser, on the road from one mile
east of Lone Pine School, is II30.
Plenty of fresh boulders here of
various rocks, some of them striated, some very much like theBelt
argillites.
Upper limit of glacial silt not for east of Sunnyside Canal.
Not
very high above the ditch.
Yakima Valley Scabland
August 9
I929
The final culminating piece of evidence by which the Spokane
12)
Flood hypothesis will stand thru all the storms of criticism lies ih'
Yakima Valley between Benton City and Prosser•
It is an assemblase of
scabland rock knobs and buttes, rock basins, channels and bars that is
utterly without explanation ifthe pokane Flood hypothesis be rejected.
There is absolutely no other way of accounting for the phenomena,
absolutely none!
For8 miles, the northern wall of the valley is strongly cliffed
of scoured andthe topographic map shows much ruged topography above
these cliffs.
Thisrugged topography isdeveloped in a minor anticline
running northwest from the Horse Heaven Hills near Erie across to
flank thebase of the longouthern alope of the Rattlesnake Range.
The ruggedness consists of rock basins nearly I00 feet deep, strikingly
bold cliffs
In the tilted flows, isolatedbuttes nearly 150 feet s3:
above adjacent basins, the whole in as intricate a maze as in any scat-
land on the plateau.
Bars here are splendid affairs, ranging from minor ones 20 to 40
feet high in the basins and in the lee of buttes to large deposits I70
feet thick and a mile long.
There can be absolutely no doubt as to
their character.
Some of them are wholly down in rock basins and b
beautifully shaped, some block preglacial valleys that crossed this
tract from the north and some constitute theeast wall of such valleys.
Several large pits opened in different bars, in which the gravel is
99.99% basalt and quartzite (the quertzite from the Satsop-Hood River-
Ellensburg gravel member), little worn to holly angular, some of it
very bouldery (boulders of basalt) and all with foreset beds.
every case the foreset beds dip up the Yakima.
Thelarge boulders
are mostly very sharp edged and clearly are freshly plucked.
Many
of them also have the stainingon some faces that joint planes in the
basalt possess, while other faces are fresh black basalt.
fleere is
almost no weathering offthe deposit, tho a good deal of calcium carbon-
ate coats the fragments.
With the big boulders of basalt are gran-
ites, perfectly fresh, quite angular, up to two feet in diameter.
The foreset bedding ishot strictly deltaic.
It consists offa ser-
les ofhearly hori ontal groups or members, each foreset from top to
bottom but separated by a thin layer of sand or fine gravel, or by a
change in the mount of dip from underlying or overlying strata of


73
of
foresets.
There are also changes in directiondip tho all are west-
ward.
The large boulders, indeed, all the angular basalt fragments,
obviously came from the scabland exposed orfunder the gravel or under ‡
thee broad silt-covered plain just to theeast, north of Benton City.
Excavation of these irregular channels and besins yielded a Duge ant.
of material and by far the most satisrectory explanation isthat it
lies in these bars.
The anticlinal character of the eroded tract istery well seen
from the new highway grade on the south side of the river.
Also the
great disembowelling, like Gable Butte.
Theasternmost of the bar deposits lies on the east wall of Corral
Canyon, and extends from its entrance into YokimaValley to the Sunny-
side Canal, more than a mile.
It is I00 feet thick.
It may have
Largely filled the canyon originally but it did not over the western
wall which is all basalt and thin loess.
Loess also covers the bar
to a depth of two to four feet.
The westernmost bar seen lies similarly along the eastern side of
Snipes Creek valley.
It is half a mile long and I70 feet thick.
The
material in its southern part is largely basalt and very coarse and
angular.
In its northern part, it isfiner in grade and has a large
percentage of pebbles from the quartzite gravel of the "lensburg in
it.
Apparently, a7 local nearby source of this sedimentary is shown
by this.
It surely is all one deposit.
Theevidence for a great current of glad al water up this portion
of the Yakima is thus irrefutable.
No one could see this place and
deny it.
But/it/splmost unbelievable, even when one sees it.
The
highest of this terribly scarred country is 950 ft A.I. anddepressions
among the rugged bare crags go down to 750 exp within less than a
quarter of a mile from the highest point.
Something like 200 feet
of erosion in basalt occurred here and some of the basins, partly in
rock, partly blocked by bars, are nearly I00 feet deep.
This scabland, developed on an anticlinal fold, can never be ex-
plained by Alden's alternative of collapsed lava caverns.
The rest
of the fold is all here, above I000, with no sign of scabland or even
of rock ledges of any sort.
Is it is an unescapable conclusion that glacial water, flowing be
back up the Yakima, did this work in the constricted place in the valley
here, one asks how many different episodes of this character were nec-
essary.
Only one isrecorded, for the bar baldiig is perfectly
proportioned to the channels and buttes.
One bar in one of the basins
in 40 feet high and composed of boulders up to three feet in diameter.
This doesnt record any later minor flooding.
If but one eposide is
involved, the volume of water passing over this scabland can readily
be computed.
Thevolume of Yakima Valley upstream from the scald and
and below II00 can be found from the topographic maps.
that can be allowed.for-the
This iskil
It is even more than can be allowed for
the last few tems of feet would have a greatly decreased current. The
depth of current,
% cannot exceed a hundred feet or so.
real maximum current, over the scarred basalt summits,
summit when the affair started.
And it all was essentially
The time involved to fill the basin
can be approximated in several figures, using different assumed veloci-
ties and dividing the cross sectional area here into total capacity of
Yelima, Valley below II00 to th west.
A correction must be m.de for
the I00-foot figure for not all of the valley here had a floor as high
as these scalland buttes.
bars record a valley about as deep then as now.
The preglacial canyons containing the big
Whatever velocities
be used, they should equal or exceed those in the Dalbes today where
the Columbia is not mingsosabland rapidly enough to be mappable.


Whatever figures may be arrived at, it is perfectly obvious
that the Spokane Flood hypothesis will demand a very, very short
time; a few days or a few weeks at the most.
What a discovery this is!
How faint my faith, that I never
dreamed of finding real seablend of the plateau type in the Yakima
constriction.
Sillusi Butte
August 9
I929
No definite scabland or bar forms here, and, without other forms
across the river, theflood hypothesis would never be applied to the
butte.
Yet there 'are scabby ledges and crags where normal erosion
profiles and surfaces would not have them.
And a notch between the
high crag at the south end and the next one to the north has a spatul-
ate shaped deposit spread out to the westof it and lower down.
This
may be agravel bar.
It isnot a dune sand deposit, in terms of dune
growth
today, tho its location makes it look as tho wind blowing
westward thru the notch had made it.
The supposed long bar trending west from the Plymouth-Kennewick
road in the lee of/Sillusi Butte has ledges of basalt along its suth-
ern crest.
It isnt all bar, at any rate..
Very difficult to do
ahything with the question of bars in this region, for there are no
sections and wind driven sand mantles everything except the basalt cliffs.
The map shows three or four depressions at the west base of
Sillusi Butte but thesday have been caused by wind-driven sand.
Kennewick
August I0
I929
five
The road to Plymouth crosses a broad gravel ridge about 700 fAT.
miles out of town and between the two elevations I025 on the west
and II93 on thelast.
No structure in thebridge but a short distarce
to the south, back of it, is a pit examined in I927 with good foresets
dipping northward and with foreign material in the chiefly basalt
gravel .
This was then thot to be a slope wash deposit from the
hill to the south, tho that want a satisfactory explanation even then.
Now it appears that this gravel is a bar accumulation,
ly blocks the drainage and it lies properly for a flood bar.
It large-
Its
composition is OK for a bar, especially in the presence of large angu-
lar basaltic cobbles.
Probably the structural flat crossed by thehiway between Richland
and Kiona, summit of the road climb, is covered with bar gravel. It I
iskluted with correctly for cuttents across from thebast and its compo-
sition, mostly Ellensburg gravel, nevertheless contains large boulders
& of basalt and some of fresh granite.
is 990 ft A.T.
Highest erratic nest on the road toward Plymouth out of Kennewick
Iowa. Flat and Cold Creek Valley Aug. II I929
The flat carrying the irrigated tracts north of Benton City is
not a silt flat.
It bears silt or loess|superficially only.
In
many places, boulders of basalt have come to light in road groding, #
ditch digging, etc. and in the northeast part, close to the slope down
to Yakima River and on that slope, the boulders and cobbles constitute
the surface itself.
This flattish tract is not plane, either.
Its broad gentle swells are bar forms, leading southwestward and west-
wald to tie big bar front on the east wall of lover Corral Canyon.
Erratics are fairly common along the road up from the Yakima half
a mile from the west edge of thePasco map.. Highest at II05 and II09


na de bissim wmeine is tram aith Beltän bauldere + Pelsm
wwraine bus wen fw. Klis mit
Winkela was + umin age , rat
, ne might aspe tut du Pa, Reuset
a der than
Pilsen
(Wisconsi


75
A rond from the gas wells east across Coldreek Valley to the Ken-
newick-Hanford road.
development of huge piles of iceberg nests.
Trom 825 down to 625 is a most startling
More than a dozen can
be seen from any point on the road.
high above the highest gound around jad, kente them are I5 to 20 feet
looks morainic, except that there are no enclosed basins, no ridging
of drift and only a. thin scattering if any erratic material between
mounds.
the
The mounds can hardly fail to be as thick as they are high for th
they are distinct pimples on the sloping structural plain that bears
only minor gullying elsewhere as a modification.
Basalt not seen
outcropping, the plain evidently carrying a thick deposit of some kind
of silt, or , rather plausibly, being a bench of Ringold at the foot o
of thee Rattlesnake Range.
The debris in these piles ishighly varied in kind of rock repre-
sented.
Of the 6 examined, four had no Columbia River basalt while
in one, the Columbia River basalt is very common, all of it in weather-
fractured fragments.
The mountain three miles away and nearly 3000
feet above could easily be the source of much basalt wasted to come
down onto this plain and to be carried across it.
But such debris
cagld hardly be in the mounds which are clearly constructional forms
piles above the slopes on which locally contributed basalt would travel.
Some of this berg ice must have carried much basalt, tho most of it was
basalt-free.
The icesheet from which these bergs came impinged
somewhere on theorthern edge of the basalt plateau.
Themost common constituent of the berg debris probably isgranite.
Slate, argillite and ingrained quartzite ranks high, thevarious tex-
tures andespecially the colors and the mudcracks, ripple marks,
thine
ness of stratification and fineness grain demand that these bergs be
traced back to mountain ranges composed of the Belt series.
Grano-
diorite porphyry, identical in every way except in abundance of basid
segregations or inclusions, isfairly common.
One place has at least
30 pieces ofthis rock scattered over a radius of 25 feet.
At least
30 different localities , from I00 feet to half a mile apart, in which
it was found.
This is another eviderce of the derivation of these
bergs from Idaho, Montana or adjacent British Columbia.
Very little gneiss was found.
If the ice had come down theOkan-
ogan from that part of British Columbia, the Shuswap gneiss would have
been a prominent constituent.
The sige and abundance of bergs stranded here iskmazing.
It
seems a wonder that, if they came down the scabland channels, there are
not plenty of such features thruout the scabland pattern.
Perhaps
lodging and melting in one place was impossible, perhaps the debris
once deposited was re-distributed.
But there are plenty of slack-
water places where these mounds shoudl occur.
Another puzzle isthe 200-foot vertical range.
The lower mounds
I can hardly record berg-stending simultaneous with that which made the
upper mounds.
Apparently a rapidly subsiding water body isrecorded.
Ice markings, l.e. striae and smoothed surfaces, are common on the
fine-grained rock fragments.
One can see them from almost any point
where he may choose to stand.
They are commonly af-ike short and
not rerely slightly curved orwith angles in their courses.
In this
respect they are like the scratches on thepebbles in the Yakima Valley
silt near Snipes Mtn., whose departure from conventional parsllel stride
along the full length of the cobble raised question as to their truly
glecial genesis.
Cold Creek Valley here is without possible question a construction-
al valley, resulting from the growth of bars over from the Spokane
Columbia.
It istoo wide for a fosse, apparently.
Thebar gravel


76
crossing.
is splendidly shown in theolean washed slopes east of the road
Koontz Coulee
Aug. II I929
That this large trench is no true valley , but is a channel, is
evident from tholarge bars which flute its floor.
There is no flat
floor in any cross section of it.
Every ranch well has a pile of 7
large cobbles and even boulders two and a half feet in diameter along-
side.
This istrue even in the broadest, least accentuated portion
where the road leads directly east to Mesa.
Nothing but a huge
stream stream across this whole flat could have transported them here,
out in the Ringold silt plain.
A beautiful side-hill bar lies up against the scabland walls east
of Mesa.
Best seen from top of west wall or thehiway from Ringold.
Bar gravel filling and blocking the 01dPalouse at Connell istrell
skew seen from the road west out of Connell.
Frontal depositional
slopes face south.
A large pit in the west part of Connell in it.
New cuts along the Milwaukee between Othello andarden, vicinity
of Novara, show a fairly uniform deposit ofbasalt gravel on what is
probably Ringold, a thinly bedded, horizontal yellow silt.
Gravel
6 to I0 feet thick, with foresets dipping south.
Highly calcareous
in upper part, almost the upper half looks white.
Seen only from the
road.
Thick Ringold or possibly Ellensburg islexposed in the lower part
of Lind Coulee, north of the soda lake of Drumheller Channels.
It is
thicker than that exposed along the road from Warden to Neppel, tho no
more than a mile or two from it.
Here should be a good opportunity
to prove, if necessary, that scabland does not underlie the cover of
sedimentary rock and abso to learn ifthe/sedimentary is tilted.
Its
presence here indicates the descent of the basalt surface north of the
anticline below theQuincy basin.
Ephrata and Soap Lake
August I2 I929
Large numbers of large rolled boulders lie along thehiway from
Ephrata toward Soap Lake.
Many are four feet maximum, some are 5,
a few are 6 ft. maximum diameter.
They seem to have a lower limit
below which they do not go.
This ishot far from the altitude of the
Ephrata "channel" floor, , the wulders lying on what corresponds with t
the south wall of this channel.
Is there any possibility that they
are morainic, instead of fluvial?
Soap Lake I90 feet by aneroid below Iphrata,m 1087 G. T.
Good exposures of abraded surfaces of the basalt on theisolated
ledge that makes a separate cliff at the southwest corner of the loke,
north of theorthernmost hotel.
Clearly notglacial
A good well
polished surface uncovered and not a trace of striae or scratches.
Imperfect groovings and incipient potholings also indicate thestream
origin of these markings.
Columns here are very Darge and perhaps
didnt pluck very well.
Fighest erratics alongthe north-south road, north fron the hiway
N-S limb justeast ofEphrate, are I437 ft. A.T.
At about 1400 is
coarse, subangular basaltic stream gravel with erratics.
Above this
is simply the lope waste and loess and sand of thebasalt hillside.
A hill stands out toward Soap Lake, lyingbetween this road and the lake,
easily seen as one appronches Soap Lake for the first two miles out of
Ephrate..
It is a part of the Soap Lake antioline, its summit not
much above 2000 A.T.
Between it and themain monooline is a broad
sag I750% ft. A.T.
(The stet hake anticles can los mined a
It is quite unscarred by glacial water and free
lying


?
77
V
from erratics.
Whatever made these enormous scabland features
of this region did not reach this high, tho it came within I80 feet
of reaching it.
The lower end of the abandoned eastern lower coulee again exam-
ined.
It ispossible to drive from Ephrata and Soap Lake, dong the
7100s id° he the late all the way 6 eat Dove indis (елого) ако:
Here in the
It mey well be Wisconsin in age.
Also a nearly plandsurface under-
lain by gravel and 50 feet or so above Alkali Lake, extends for more
than a mile alons theast side of the main couledbetween the two lakes.
A steep climb isnecessary to get up into the lower end of the aban-
doned higher eastern coulee channel
"he main floor up here is
420 feet above tha lake (Alkali).
Thisis approximately the alti-
tude of the base of thebreat bladed salient at the south end of therag-
ged divide separating the eastern and western channels.
Theeas tern
channel floor has been trenched a hundred feet deep along its lower
mile, this trenching necessitated apparently by thedescending surface,
northward of the resistant flow which constitutes the floor of the e
east channel.
he end of this inner channel is a cataract cliff,
also about I00 feet high.
But the existence of a fine bar here,
ing along the east side of the alcove formed by the retreat of this
cataract, thetop of which is almost as high as the lip of the fall,
that Chen eat one current bride made the here, 0018 haven no есетоте
that the cataract was subfluvial.
of the surface of the great glacial river over this fall.
Theßar isf50 feet high on its lower end, descending to thelevel of
of the 70-foot bar alon Alkali Lake.
Therefore, the western or main
channel was within 70 feet of its present depth before the higher east-
ern channel was abandoned.
Less than a thousand feet upstream from the lip of this subfluvia)
cascade is a rock basin in the middle of the inner channel, I00 feet
deep•
Its upstream lip is smewhat notched andits western wall is
fairly gentle and mantled with debris.
But its east and south vall
are essentially vertical.
Is this a plunge pool?
Can plunge podls
and subfluvial cataracts be harmonized?
Yes, if the vanished catar-
act, to which the plunge would be ascribed, was high enough above the
surface of the great river in the main channel.
Good remnants of the worn, abraded, even polished floor of the
inner channel to be found between the plunge pool and the subfluvial
cataract.
Here again islevidence that locally at least the basalt
was really smoothed and abraded fast enough so that plucking did not
destroy all recotds of it.
Soap Lake and Moses Lake
August I2 I929
Thegreat back slope of the gravel fill south of Soap Lake is an
impressive feature whose meaning cannt be escaped.
with thanorth
end ofSoap Lake as a center, an arc with 6 mile radius struck from
Ephrate to Adrian will approximately the high rim of the funnel-shaped
slope.
cent is 250 feet from rim to funnel mouth.
well seen from the top of the hill out of Soap Lake town.
Here also
is apparent a high bar, approximately as high as the rim, lying along
the west side of the funnel against the higher basalt hills.
This
bar has blocked runoff from these slopes into Soap Lakebasin and has
been trenched by a narrow gully in ondplace.
An aggraded flat back
of it, notseen from this viewpoint, adds to the argument for bar origin.
Structure of the bar not shov in the gulch but the ridge form isappar-
ent even from the back or west side.


78
Ther im ignoteverywhere of thepame altitude.
It isperceptibly
lower in its central portion, a little east of south of Soap Lake.
Yet there is no definite notching of this rim except for the very in-
significant talk y less than a mile west of Soap Lakestation (Grant Or
chards PO) •
This/ feature at tle rim is not 50 feet deep and not
1000 feet wide tho it widens out and deepens consistently southward
toward the lead of Moses Lale.
No notch leading toward the Adrian
Sink and thehead ofwillow
Greek channel was seen.
ltitude of the floor in thnotch west of Soap Lake station is 77
II27 A.T., 75 feet lower than the station and I50 feet lower than
Ephrata.
Its walls, if 50 feet high, make the rim altitude not low-
er than II75.
The rim at Ephrata is 60 feet above the tow or I337 GT.
The range in altitude of the rim therefore is about I60 feet.
Perhaps thiswas not all in the original profile.
The capacity
of tle notch here is far too slight to care for the water which eroded
the channel now occupied by Moses Lake.
into the channel .
Thechannel widens at the Hatchery andstill more
at the hiway crossing and , seen from the top of the hiway grade on
the east, there are broad imperfedt terraces descending southward into
the channel from the rim.
If thie correct, Wisconsin water flowed over surfaces I200 AT
here to escape from theSoap Lake basin.
Indeed, this isa necessary
considered Wisconsin.
of the station, I234 A.T.
A traverse south to Neppel anchorth to Gloyd and Stratford does
not help much in resolving the riddle of the topography of this great
mass ofgravel in Quincy Basin.
The highest portions, above 1200
for an approximation, are to be correlated with the equally high gravel
about Gloyd and must be ofthe same age as the high scabland in the an-
gle between Crab reek and Willow Creek.
Thelowest surfaces, ccup-
ied by Moses Lake, Rocky Ford Creek, Willow Creek and perhaps Ephrata
channel are to be correlated with the Wisconsin discharge.
They are
erosional surfaces, engept for local well-developed bars.
There seems, however, to be an intermediate terrace-like surface,
abutting against the base of a steep searp in thehighest gravel but in
other places appearing to develop simply from the high gravel surface
by descending at a slightly steeper gradient until it lies alongside,
25 a lower terrace.
Thisfeature is found along Willow Creek and
aLong Moses Lake.
It has scarps descending to the Wisconsin channels.
In one place, a strand of it appears to cross from Willow Creek to Moses
Lake.
It may be tentatively considered as a record of an earlier dis-
section of the great fill, thelidea being fathered by belief that a rec-
ord of a second flood should be found.
But unless good substantial
evidence for this second flood is found elsewhere, this conclusion wil
be of little worth.
In both the intermediate terrace and the highest gravel, fo reset
dip southward in thehivay cuts along theast side of the lake.
A small tributary entering Crab Creek from the south, half a mile
west of Stratfod station, has a fine bar blocking its mouth, now tren-
ched..
It iqmore than 50 feet high and its structure shows foresets
dipping dow Crab Creek on its face, and badk up into the tributery in
its back slope.
Scabland covers the spur in theupstream angle bet-
moon this tributor" ana bros undo vid ext baba yaree baut ders have been


79
The scallabd in Willow Gerook channo? /obr- south of 9107d 18
simply an extension of that east of cadyd and unburied by gravel.
It
is illogical to consider It a product of the channel drainage.
The
same conclusion applies w theseabland in the floor of Rocky Ford Or.
chennel just above the|foish hatchery.
Adrien and Stratford Vicinity
Aug I3 I929
I can find no avidencehere of a spill thru Grand Coulee of
Grand and Dry coulees after Crab Creek river ceased to flow.
There
are two places where a suggestion of such a sequence may be seen but
neither are as well explained by thes hypothesis as by that of one fo
flood.
TheAdrian terrace of previous notes certainly has a sloping top,
the gentle descent being to the west and to the north.
Therganner
in which it slopes back toward the scabland channel of Dry Coulee
suggests strongly the back slope of the gravel deposit south of Soap
Lake.
East of this terrace is a channel about 60 feet deep, its floor
terminating in ad lower terrace up onto which the hivay climbs just as
north of Adrian.
It isthe lowest part of Dry Coulee.
Hast of it
is a broad rolling gravel flat nearly as high as the Adrian terrace in
its highest part.
Thisterrace or rolling gravel flat descends gently
northward toward the north wall of Crab Creek Valley and even more gen-
tlyeastward up Crab Creek.
It looks very much as tho this also were
a subfluvial gravel slope, adjusted o the great current westward down
Crab Creek Valley.
This eastern slope extends east beyong the big
orchards here, within a mile of Stratford.
The channel, 50 to 60 feet deep, which separates these two prom-
inent gravel fills may be considered as simply the deeper portion of
the glacial stream out of Dry Coulee or it may be a later affair.
For a long time, I thot of it as a Wisconsin channel.
Its a titude
at the end of the channel, just north of/Adrian, is I284, 50 feet higher
than Adrian which idessentially on the floor of the Willow Creek chan-
nel.
If the Wisconsin descharge out of Soap Lake basin thru Adrian
Sink into Willow Creek channel were 50 feet deeper
Sunt bat couleen this airrorence in siticad a cons en air 1 00225 En
the use of this interpretation.
That it probably was that deep
seems indicated by the fact that the very head of this Adrian Sink-
Willow Creek channel, on thebast brim of the Soap Lake depression, is
I200 ft. A.T.
The upgrade of 34 feet to Adrian is a channel feat-
ure for a large river, not for a shallow stream.
Yet this Dry Coulee inner channel in gravel is not a good clean-cut
channel feature and it may yet be that no Wisconsin water ever came
thru it.
In such case, there is no need to concern oneself about
the 50%-foot difference between the two channel floors.
Another feature that must be considered is the structure of these
gravel deposits.
Ixposures are limited.
TheAdrian "terrace" shows
west-dipping foresets in the scarp-like southern front along the north
side of Adrian Sink and the head of Willow Creek channel.
So does
the gravel in the lip of the Dry Coulee inner channel.
In the southe
ern slope of the orchard gravel "terrace", east of the inner channel o
of Dry Coulee, the GRR has a large pit in which the gravel is almost
e11 foreset and in which the foresets dip prevailingly south, tho some
dip southeast and some southwest.
Some of the southeast dips are
along the hiway grade up the east wall of the inner channel.
This
looked et first like the record of/a big stream down Dry Coulee after
Crab Creek River had ceased to flow.
Butmost of the gravel here
was deposited under the influence of both great glacial streams meet-


80
ing essentially at this place.
The notabie constriction of Crab Ureek valley bottom just east
of Adrian, comes at the location of this GNAR gravel pit.
From the
hiway, the stream bed or the GNRR , itlooks rather significant of
a preponderant discharge from Dry Coulee, or a later discharge after
Grab Creek river had ceased to flow.
But its scarp is not more then
a hundred feet high and the marked scabland knobs on the south side
here are not 30 feet higher.
Seen from the top of the gravel depos-
it and a thousand feet or so back of the brink, these scabland knobs
seem buried almost flush in a gravel plain.
Seen from tle higher
scabland buttes a mile to the east, with the vertical element notably
reduced tho the full height of these buttes in view, they become only
channel floor buttes, mid-channel buttes in position, for theblacial
river floor (gravel flat and butte tops) extends well south of these
buttes.
It is from this viewpoint that the channel relations are
best seen add understood.
There is another place where relations suggest a sequence in op-
eration of Dry Coulee ardCrab Creek rivers.
It is the highest marked
scabland in the interstream angle between Dry Coulee and Crab Creek
valleys.
spur in a way that indicates the work ofCrab
g the scandana dore a deme ones on the E cater de Bathe
But the s
gravel deposit here (I400 ft A.T.) overlaps apparently from the west,
as tho thrown eastward out of Dry Coulee after the scablard had been
eroded.
This may not record any sequence.
Even if it does, that sequ-
ence may be simply & change in capacity or in depth at the head of
Grand Coulee during the episode, a lowing more water dow Grand (and
therefore Dry) relative to Crab; perhaps even a decrease in Crab for
that same reason.
Several splendid bars lie in Crab Creek near Stratford.
At least
three big ones that along the northern wall that I havent noted before.
They are really continuous past minor headlands.
One climbed north
of Stratford by party last year when waiting for the Princeton special
is 200 feet above Stratford andisreally compound, a lower one lying on
the valleyward side face of the large one.
Excellent fosse develop-
ment back of all.
Another large one along the road to Coulee from
the big orchard tract west of Stratford.
It also has a fine broad
fosse, the blocked mouth of a preglacial tributary valley here.
Two miles ortwo and a half miles east of Stratford on the suth
side of the valley is another fine bar, I40 feet higher than tlee RR
grade.
A very good fosse back of it.
A pit in it/shows foresets
of fine basalt gravel dipping back toward the valley slope.
This bar
nicely fills and smooths out a large southward bend in the preglacial
Crab Creek vallet ¼.
Just north of it, on the opposite side of the
valley, is a fine scalped spur-of-se and truncated spur of scabland.
The ensemble can be explained only by the flood hypothesis.
Another large compound bar lies as the south side of the valley
two or three piles west of Wilson Creek
A road climbs southward
over it.
hot travelled.
The bar group just west of Wilson Creek re-examined.
I will at
stick to every statement made in print concerning it.
Thisis a
wonderful lace for critics to visit.


81
Grand Coulee
Hartline Basin is an integrel part of Grand Coules.
Its gravel
Reposit is simply a huge congeries of very broad, flat bars, tailing
out into theDeadman's Draw scabland and terminating on the east for
most of thatmargin as a very definite scarp or bar front, 30 to 60 It
high, overlooking lower country that is mostyPalouse 10688 .
Every gravel exposure shows structure that agrees with this inter-
pretation.
Foresets are present in every cut and in many, the st-
ructure islessentially all foreset.
In the eastern part of the fill
foresets dip east, in the northwestern part (top of hiway climb out of
Grand Coulee) they dip northeast and east, and in the southeastern
marginal part, they dip southeast.
The northeast dip isclearly
the product of an eddy in the lee of the scabland salient between upper
Grand Coulee and Hattline Basin.
Only a broad sheet of vigorously
flowing water out of Grand Coulee could put this gravel over this
broad area and could give it the structures it possesses.
This gravel terminates on the south, against the scabland, in
two different ways.
For a few miles east of the Grand Coulee complex
of canyons south ofCoulee City, the gravel slopes up toward the south
and has scabland, with patches of gravel, south of it and higher than
it is.
East from the old Arbuckle place, strongly expressed, deeply
trenched scabland in buttes and channels, lies south of the gravel and
lower than it is.
largest bar having a southern and
Here the gravel terminates in bar forms,
the
southeastern facing scarp 30 feet
or so high.
Thoscabland mapped as isolated in the southern part of Hartline
Basin really is continuous up into the basin from the district south e
of the gravel.
It isless in extent than forrerly described, proba-
bly not exceeding two square miples in area.
The pre-scabland Palouse loess of Hartline basin still underlies
She flood gravel in at least one place.
At the east corner of sec-
tions 25 and 36,
T25N, R28E, the debris frorddug well still lies heaped
up about it.
Gravel lies on the west side and Palouse loess around
This is abrat l'4 the other sides.
From relative proportions, for it was not mixed,
about a fourth or a fifth of it is gravel.
From timing cobbles
lewsms Rench dropped into it, the well is about I00 feet deep, and thus about 20
to 25 feet of gravel Zoverlies a buried loess here.
This indicates
facing Coulee City ishigh.
Since the location is only about a mile
east of the scarp, this seems to show that a preglacial loess-covered
Gramess surface probobly extended westward across the structural Dasin vhich
constitutes the coulee here at an altitude somewhat above the present
eroded floor.
Another and more striking case of scabland gravel above Palouse
loess is in a very high and massive bar a mile or a mile and a half
north ofBacon, and just west of tie Soap Lake-Coulee City hiway.
Both sides of this bar, the east and the west,
show outcrops of the to
loess up for 30 to 50 feet above the base.
Above this is at least
I50 feet of gravel in a splendid bar form, projecting southeastward
from a high scabland tract to the northwest.
Clearly the flood here
did no erosive work.
A structural alope descending southeastward
carries the basalt down about 300 feet in about 3 miles.
The struc-
tural. basin to the southeast, confined on the south by Pinto Ridge,
must have carried as thick a loess cover as anywhere in the region.
This 30 to 50 feet beneath the bar is all that is left of it.
Both
east and west of the location of the bar, it was swept off and the
basalt was eroded into scabland forms.
Here there was little or no
erosion.
The lack offerosion may have been due
I- to the presence
of a high knob originally in the upstream direction ,northward, or


82.
2- to deposition of a complete mantle of gravel all along this
structural slope in the initial stages of the flood,and the erosion
of most of it in later stages when the splendid canyons to the right e
and the left were developed.
It iscertain that the bar is a shape left by great currents on
either ste.
The exposures of loess on both sides are certainly
erosional and this argues that the reminder of the slopes, in gravel
above the loess, are also erosional.
The second explanation thus
seems to be favored.
Later-- Seeing this great bar (I560 Base on south side,
I820 sum-
mit) from tle Pinto Ridge view point south ofBacon adds an item to this
interpretation.
The erosional slopes are only the lower 75 to I00
feet, all the rest is in gentler, smoothly flowing tune bar profiles.
The original deposit therefore was a bar I60 to I90 feet high above
adjacent depositional surfaces, also bars in genesis.
The cutting
of the canyons on either side made possible the removal of such flank-
ing lower gravel deposits and left the erosional scarp bordering the I
lower slopes and exposing the loess.
Thus an inttial higher tract
northwest of the bar (upstream) is required.
The two coulee canyons
therefore must be considered as preglacial drainage furrows similar to
those now on the slopes of Pinto Ridge and High Hill above the level ÷
of theflood.
The ends way these great bars of the structural depression north
and east of Bacon point toward Spring Coulee ishery interesting.
Not
one bar, except in or very close to Dry Coulee or Lenore Canyon, areis
oriented for flow out thru Dry Coulee.
Spring Coulee thus appears
to have been the preglacial datlet of the depression.
That it carr-
ied an enormous volume ismore obvious not than ever before.
Seen
from above, scabland lies back of its cliffs in strong development.
A pronounced subsidiary canyon, never seen before, parallels Spring
Coulee along the south side close to the head of Long Lake.
It isse
more than a mile long and has a good cataract cliff in it, and numerous
buttes.
Between it and the main Spring Coulee is a splendid elon-
gated mid-channel butte, the north face of which makes the prominent
crags here along the south side of Spring Coulee.
Highest erratics on the north slope of High Hill are I850 A.T.
This is higher than any other upper limit in this latitude in the Grand
Coulee region.
Lenore and Dry seem to have had their greatest erosion after the
great bars of the Bacon depression had been forreed.
Likewise,
the
flood over the south edge of the Hartline basin seems to have been are
drained off by this time, else the bar forms would have been modified
to show spill thru Dry Coulee.
(I wonder if this is right.
Better think itfver after the map is completed)
