VOLUME XXXVII
NUMBER 5
THE
JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY
July-August 1929
VALLEY DEPOSITS IMMEDIATELY EAST OF THE
CHANNELED SCABLAND OF WASHINGTON. I
I HARLEN BRETZ
University of Chicago
ABSTRACT
Forty-one valleys whose drainage enters the eastern margin of scabland spillways
are known to contain deposits made by glacial waters. Thirty-nine of these valleys
never have carried drainage from glaciated areas, and the glacial waters in them must
have been backed up from the scabland. These deposits possess such extraordinary fea-
tures and relations that they, like the scabland topographic forms, are considered
unique.
I.
Each separate area of backwater is recorded by a widespread mantle of silt con-
taining abundant grains of unweathered basalt (the country rock) and pebbles of foreign
rock.
2. In each, this mantle extends up to a definite upper limit on the valley slopes and
along the valley lengths.
3. These upper limits in each case agree closely with the upper limit of scabland
where the valley enters
4. The altitudes of the upper limits, constant throughout any one backwater area,
vary with different pondings, forming a descending series from north to south along the
scabland gradient.
5. Remarkable large mounded gravel deposits in the tributary valley debouchures
possess foreset strata which dip out of the scabland and up the valleys. The composi-
tion, topography, topographical relations, structure, and size of these deposits are in-
explicable without great reverse currents.
6. In no case could these reverse currents continue through and escape from the
valleys they entered. They are simply a record of the rapid backflow into these valleys.
It is concluded that these glacio-aqueous deposits cannot be explained by condi-
tions associated with ordinary glacial ablation or by a sequence of several Pleistocene
epochs. They require the volume and rapid rise of glacial rivers across the plateau,
which the writer has previously read from the scabland itself.
INTRODUCTION
About forty different stream valleys draining westward into the
easternmost of the channeled scabland tracts of the Columbia Pla-
teau in Washington are considered in this paper. Many of them are
393
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


394
J HARLEN BRETZ
tributary to others, so that the total number of separate entrances
into the scabland is twelve. The northernmost and southernmost of
these entrances, measured along the scabland margin, are about I25
miles apart.
The deposits studied are thickest and coarsest close to the en-
trance of these valleys into the scabland. They extend up on the val-
ley slopes as high as the loessial scarp bases along the adjacent scab-
land. They also extend back up these valleys approximately to the
crossing of the contour which marks both their upper limit and the
scarp bases at debouchure into the scabland. In all but three of these
valleys, essentially the full length was examined, and the absence of
these deposits farther upstream than the contour crossing was es-
tablished for all but two. But the distance upstream to such crossings
and the altitude of these crossings vary in different valleys.
Although the deposits are prevailingly coarser nearer the scab-
land, there are great variations in character and structure in any one
portion of a valley. The diversity much exceeds anything ever pre-
viously reported for stream-valley deposits, so far as the writer is
aware. A classification might be attempted on the basis of textural
gradations; it might also be constructed on a basis of sedimentary
structures. Either method may give the impression that these sedi-
ments are much like other silt, sand, gravel, and boulder accumula-
tions, or that the genesis of their bedding structures is similar. The
only terms available for description of these deposits have genetic
associations, and it will be difficult to avoid an erroneous mental pic-
ture despite caution on the part of both writer and reader. The
printed page cannot convey the picture which field acquaintance
gives, for there probably is nothing in the reader's experience suf-
ficiently resembling the structural, textural, and topographic fea-
tures of these deposits. All gradations and interminglings possible
exist. One must not think of the textural types as distinctly sepa-
rated from each other. To do so is to miss one of the most significant
facts regarding them.
The region will be treated areally, and the distribution and rela-
tions of the deposits will be considered valley by valley, beginning in
the north and progressing southward along the eastern margin of the
scabland. The area involved is shown in Figure 1. Three of the
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 395
twelve separate valley entrances into the scabland are major streams.
Palouse River has one tributary sharing in the record, Snake River
has eleven with three subtributaries, and Walla Walla River has four
tributaries and seven subtributaries which carry the deposits. In ad-
dition there are eight separate minor valley entrances, and among
JASMINGTON
DAMO
La Crosse
Saraha
Wartsbu
WASHINGTON'
OREGON
M
E s
FIG. 1.- Valleys immediately east of channeled scabland
them four tributary valleys to be considered. This total of forty-one
distinct valleys is only the total of those examined. Because of limi-
tation of time, at least a dozen more tributaries and subtributaries of
Snake River, joining below the known upper limits of loessial scarps
and valley deposits, had to be left for later examination.
PALOUSE RIVER DRAINAGE
KAMIACHE CREEK VALLEY
The northernmost valley involved in this study is that of Kami-
ache Creek which enters the scabland just south of Rock Lake in
northwestern Whitman County. The valley is only 7 miles long,
though the stream flows 2 miles beyond the valley mouth across
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


396
J HARLEN BRETZ
scabland before it joins Rock Creek at the foot of the deep rock-
basined lake. The contrast between the ~ miles of normal stream val-
ley and the 2 miles of scabland can hardly be appreciated by one who
has not seen it. Probably nothing like this has ever been described.
Above the entrance to the scabland the valley is wide and flat bot-
tomed, with alluvial deposits and low terraces on the floor, and with
stream-etched slopes descending to it from the divides surrounding
it. Through this valley the creek flows with a gradient normal to
such minor streams in a mature topography. But out on the scab-
land there is no valley at all. Bare and rugged rocky buttes are dis-
tributed very irregularly among the rock basins and rock-bottomed
spillways which separate them, making the anastomosing pattern
which is typical of scabland. The extreme youthfulness of slopes
here is emphasized by the cliffs, the blocky talus, and the unfilled
basins. The utter unlikeness of this anastomosing pattern to stream
valleys has been repeatedly pointed out by the writer as indicating
that scabland is stream-channel topography. The impossibility of
these channels recording a succession of routes has also been shown.
They are contemporaneous and constitute simply the highly diver-
sified rock floor of a very great glacial river whose surface was higher
than the tops of the buttes.
Another topographic feature unique in the scabland system is the
lines of steep loessial scarps which truncate the mature topographic
forms to the east and overlook the scabland to the west. The base of
the scarp immediately north of Kamiache Creek entrance is 1,880
feet A.T. Scabland descends thence down to Rock Lake, 145 feet
lower, and in the rock basin of the lake to a reported depth of 250
feet. The total vertical range, therefore, is nearly 400 feet. The
loessial scarps belong to the scabland forms, not to the older slopes
along the creek valley.
If, then, Kamiache Creek above the scabland is much older than
the scabland itself' and its bordering scarps, and if the volume and
1 Kirk Bryan, in U.S. Geological Survey Bull. 790-B, clearly recognizes the existence
of two kinds of drainage ways on the Columbia Plateau in Washington, one group (scab-
land) containing those "that were deepened and modified by the great streams diverted
across the plateau during glacial time" and the other group, those "developed by normal
erosion before the diversion of the glacial waters." He notes that some normal valleys
"formed in a cycle of erosion that antedates the great coulees produced in the diversion
of the glacial waters" are tributary to scabland spillways.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 397
depth of the glacial rivers were as great as the writer has argued, the
lower part of this creek valley must have been flooded with glacial
water back from its entrance into scabland. Whatever may be ex-
pected or interpreted as a record of this flooding must not occur
higher on the valley sides or higher upstream than approximately
1,880 feet, and it must be well marked below that altitude. These re-
strictions, set forth for Kamiache Creek valley, are applicable equal-
ly and are equally required for the forty other valleys considered.
Kamiache Creek valley is remarkably constricted at its debouch-
ure into scabland where the stream crosses the line of loessial scarps.
The bottom width in the valley itself is about 1,000 feet for 3 or
4 miles above the mouth, but in the mouth there is no bottom width.
Instead, the stream enters a narrow gulch about half a mile long
and 50-100 feet deep, through which it descends 100 feet in passing
from the normal valley to the scabland. The south wall and the bot-
tom of this gulch are of basalt; the north wall is of gravel.
If one climbs this northern gravel wall of the gulch, he finds him-
self on a remarkable spur which projects southward completely
across the valley (save for the gulch itself) from the northern valley
slope. This spur is 1,000 feet long (across the valley mouth) and
about half a mile wide (measured with the stream length). Its sum-
mit is 150 feet higher than the scabland immediately west and 50
feet higher than the valley floor immediately east. This summit is
irregularly rolling and has undrained depressions on it. On the east it
descends steeply to the flat valley floor.
The spur which thus transforms Kamiache Valley at the mouth
into a narrow gulch is composed of very angular and poorly sorted
basalt pebbles, cobbles, and boulders. A pit on the west side of the
spur near the base shows only foreset beds, dipping 21°-23° south-
ward across the course of the valley, along the scabland length, and
along the direction of the aligned loessial scarps. The top of this
singular deposit is 1,865 feet A.T., 15 feet lower than the scarp base
about half a mile to the northward. Between them are bare, or
nearly bare, knobs and ledges of the highest scabland.
The flat floor and gentle slopes of Kamiache Valley afford only
one adequate section in the first 4 miles east of this abnormal gravel
deposit. The material exposed is sandy silt, poorly stratified and
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


398
J HARLEN BRETZ
poorly sorted." Unweathered pebbles scattered irregularly through
this material are composed of various rocks which certainly do not
outcrop in the creek's drainage area. A small unweathered granite
boulder was found at 1,850 feet A.T. East of this point, only allu-
vium of reworked loess, containing some basalt gravel, was found on
the valley floor, and only loess on the valley slopes. There is no
gravel deposit between the basalt and the loess and, therefore, no
possibility of deriving the fresh granite, quartzite, etc., from the
creek's drainage area. There is no possibility whatever that the great
deposit of angular basalt gravel, containing boulders 3 feet in diam-
eter, rising abruptly 50 feet above the flood plain, containing long
deltaic foresets dipping southward across the valley, and clearly once
completely blocking the valley, has been made by the creek. Just
above the summit altitude of the gravel deposit are loessial scarps
facing scabland to the west. This gravel mound, lying along the mar-
gin of the scabland and extending throughout almost its whole ex-
posed vertical range, is a unit deposit with a definite topographic
form modified subsequently only by erosion of the narrow gulch. It
is a torrential deposit of some sort, built originally from the north
completely across the mouth of the valley, and definitely related to
the genesis of the scabland. The silt and erratic material up the val-
ley do not occur higher than the summit level of this barrier.
1 This silt was shaken through a series of ten sieves ranging from I mm. opening
down to o.074 mm. Material stopping on the 1 mm. sieve yielded recognizable particles
of granite, quartzite, schist, mica, feldspar, clear quartz, and basalt. The quartz is
abundant, its grains mostly sharp angular pieces with hackly surfaces, though some
grains are rounded. Grains partly of quartz and partly of feldspar, and others of quartz
with mica only partially embedded in it, tell of mechanical disintegration without
weathering. The mica occurs in thick pieces, essentially broken mica crystals, instead of
mica flakes. The percentage of basalt, the country rock, is low. It occurs as angular
broken particles of fresh black rock and also as crumblike bits of reddish weathered rock.
Material stopping on the o.71 mm. sieve has a higher percentage of fresh broken bits of
basalt, though down through the finer sieves the proportionate amount of basalt de-
creases rapidly while the proportion of quartz increases to 75 per cent on the o.147 mm.
sieve. Many of the particles of quartz on this sieve are shaped like splinters, two or three
times as long as wide or thick. More than 50 per cent of the silt stops on or passes the
0.074 mm. sieve (200 meshes to the inch). In texture and in color it is identical with the
loess of the nearby higher slopes.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 399
COTTONWOOD CREEK VALLEY
This much larger stream enters the scabland 1⅓ miles southwest
of the mouth of Kamiache Valley. The same striking contrasts be-
tween the topography upstream and downstream from its entrance
exist as in Kamiache Creek. The interpretation of scabland as chan-
nel topography demands the same corroborative evidence in this
valley. It is here but differently expressed.
The valley-mouth bar depending from the north and constricting
the valley is much less definitely shown. It apparently never com-
pletely crossed Cottonwood Valley. There is no gulch across it and
no steepened gradient comparable to the Kamiache features. But
there is another bar, just south of the mouth of Cottonwood Creek
valley, and its relations to scabland on the west and to loessial
scarps on the east are clearly shown. Its upper surface falls but little
short of the scarp base, its slopes are broadly convex and it partially
buries scabland knobs. Bar deposits, therefore, testify to the depth
of water in the glacial river at the mouth of Cottonwood Creek and
indicate the necessity for silt deposits back in Cottonwood Valley
pond.
Such silt is exposed in many places in the mature valley, extend-
ing back at least 6 miles from the bar. Since the valley-mouth bar
does not appear ever to have constituted a dam, the silt can hardly
be interpreted as deposited in a local pond. That it is not wholly
from local drainage is abundantly shown by the presence of many
pebbles of varied foreign materials.
The silt occurs in definite terraces near the junction of Pleasant
Valley with Cottonwood Creek. Both streams have re-excavated
their valleys to a depth of 3o or 4o feet in this silt, and many minor
drainage furrows have been eroded across the terraces. Two miles or
so farther up each valley, the silt deposit constitutes a fairly com-
plete floor, only slightly trenched by streams.
A 3o-foot clean section of the silt shows distinct stratification.
Some strata are composed of the local loess, rehandled by water and
largely free from other material. Other strata have abundant grains
and small pebbles of basalt scattered through the dominant loess.
Much less numerous are the angular grains and pebbles of foreign
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


400
J HARLEN BRETZ
rock. They are rarely grouped together in laminae, lenses, or pock-
ets. The undisturbed stratification shows that the widespread dis-
semination of coarser material through the loess-silt is a result of
original transportation and deposition together."
This association of grains and small pebbles of foreign rock and
of both fresh and weathered basalt in the reworked loess is consist-
ently present in all the silt deposits described in this paper. What-
ever the cause of ponding in these valleys, it did not allow the degree
of sorting and segregation that occurs in essentially all water-laid
deposits. Glaciers and mud flows leave unsorted valley deposits but
obviously did not make these.
The silts in Pleasant Valley were identified within 2 miles of St.
John at an upper limit of 1,940 feet A.T. None was found higher on
the slope or higher up the valley, a feature indicating transportation
up-valley rather than down-valley.?
PALOUSE RIVER VALLEY
This stream enters the scabland about 8 miles south of the en-
trance of Cottonwood Valley and at an altitude approximately 200
*Three samples of the silt in Cottonwood and Pleasant valleys were sieved, as de-
scribed for the silt of Kamiache Valley. One sample came from the highest of the de-
posit, 1,940 feet A.T., and in all respects was like the other two. Material stopped on
the 1 mm. screen was about 50 per cent basalt, all in small pieces. The larger fragments,
ranging up to I inch in diameter, consist of granite, quartzite of several colors and tex-
tures, vein quartz, phyllite, muscovite schist, broken feldspar, and muscovite crystals.
One mica fragment measured \ X7 inch. Part of the basalt present is in unweathered
or but slightly weathered angular pieces whose surfaces are cleanly broken, part consists
of much weathered pellets and crumbling pieces. In material stopped on the o.71 mm.
sieve and examined under a magnification of ten, some of the weathered pieces break
when compressed in small tweezers or yield a claylike material when scraped. Yet some
of the clean-fractured basalt particles are so hard that their sharp edges will take a steel
mark from a knife blade. Sharply angular quartz grains are found in all the coarser
sieves, though such sizes are unknown in the loess above the glacial water level, as are
the bits of foreign rock. The material stopped by, and passing, the 0.074 mm. sieve
amounts to 58 per cent, 6o per cent, and 85 per cent in the three samples.
? This altitude of 1,940 feet is 6o feet above the highest scarp bases in this latitude.
If there is no error in measuring, it seems to indicate that the glacial waters in the scab-
lands reached well up on some of the scarps and that scarp bases, therefore, are not the
upper limits of the glacial rivers in the scablands. More evidence indicating this is
found in a minor valley entering the scabland about 2 miles south of the entrance of
Cottonwood. The scarp bases here are 1,865 feet A.T., and the silt occurs for half a
mile back in it and 20 or 30 feet higher. It is the same type of deposit, carrying abundant
coarse angular grains of black basalt with a few granite and quartzite particles.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 401
feet lower. The profile of the floor of Palouse Canyon continues out
into the scabland without interruption; the canyon walls, though
scoured into scabland forms, are traceable for some miles out into
the glacial drainage way; and the normal canyon for 12 miles above
the scabland is clogged with thick gravel deposits. Though the
gravel is now dissected, there are extensive remnants of the original
surface, and these consistently descend toward the east, or up-
canyon. The bar profiles are unmistakable. A large remnant on the
south side of the canyon also slopes down toward this wall, creating
a broad fosse between the gravel mound and the north-facing cliffs.
The maximum thickness of this gravel is more than 75 feet. Sections
are few and unsatisfactory. One exposure in the eastern and lower
part of the deposit shows irregularly bedded basaltic gravel, coarse
basaltic sand, and fine brown sand and silt, with a total thickness of
40 feet. Cobbles and pebbles of various kinds of foreign rock are
present.
There is no road or railroad along Palouse Canyon for nearly 20
miles, and no examination was made for silts up-valley from the
significant gravel deposits. But Lancaster Creek, a tributary enter-
ing from the northeast, contains this silt for at least 4 miles above its
junction with the Palouse, or 5 miles by valley from the scabland
margin. A section 15 feet thick at 1,615 feet A.T. showed dissemi-
nated coarse grains and pebbles of fresh basalt, and a few foreign
fragments.*
REBEL FLAT CREEK VALLEY
The preglacial course of Palouse Canyon makes a right-angled
turn to the south less than a mile out in the scabland and another
right angled turn back toward the west about 5 miles farther down-
stream. At this latter angle, where the town of Winona stands,
Rebel Flat Creek enters Palouse River from the east. Scarp bases
just south of Winona, marking high-level divergences southward
Seventeen per cent by weight of the total sample of this silt stopped on the 1 mm.
sieve. Half of this consists of 6 angular pebbles of foreign rock. Seventy-five per cent of
the remainder is basalt. By the mechanical tests outlined in describing silts of Cotton-
wood and Pleasant valleys, most of this basalt is but slightly weathered, though some is
friable and soft. The little weathered basalt looks perfectly fresh in color; the crumbling
particles are dark red in color and commonly do not show the clean-broken chiplike
shapes with sharp edges. Seventy-one per cent of the total sample is essentially loess in
texture and color.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


402
J HARLEN BRETZ
across the preglacial divide toward Union Flat Creek, are 1,605 feet
AT. The floor of Rebel Flat is adjusted to the Palouse Valley floor
at Winona. Its tributary valleys and all its slopes show that it is but
a part of the general maturity east of the scabland, far older than the
youthful scabland. Silt deposits for a few miles east of Winona show
that, like the valleys thus far described, Rebel Flat was here in essen-
tially present proportions before the glacial discharge eroded the
scablands.
The silt deposits extend up this valley for at least 3 miles east of
the scabland. One section, a mile east of Winona, shows 15 feet of
material, well stratified and well sorted, mostly rehandled loess.
Near the bottom of the section are two or three layers containing
coarse black basaltic sand. A very few small erratic pebbles were
found.
Near the up-valley limit of the silt are dissected terraces, 25-30
feet high, cuts in which show poorly stratified and poorly sorted peb-
bly silt. No deposits and no terraces of this character were found
farther east. The highest altitude in which the silt is known to occur
in this valley is 2 miles west of Endicott, 1,500 feet A.T. and 105 feet
below the scarp bases at Winona.' But shallow road cuts are the only
sections available, and in these the overlying loess or dust generally is
not cut through. No gravel deposit has been identified back in the
mouth of Rebel Flat Valley.
UNION FLAT CREEK VALLEY
The lower 15-18 miles of Rebel Flat and Union Flat are nearly
parallel, with an upland about 5 miles wide separating them. The
southern valley is much longer, however, and its gradient near scab-
land is lower than that of Rebel Flat. Correspondingly, silts record-
ing glacial backwater extend farther east in Union Flat. They are
exposed in road cuts along approximately 14 miles of this valley,
1 The material stopped by the 1 mm. sieve, 8 per cent of the total sample, is domi-
nantly of basalt, most of which is but little weathered, though a few particles are much
decayed. Foreign rock is represented by bits of granite and quartzite. Ten per cent of
this coarsest material is quartz. On the o.71 mm. sieve a larger percentage of the basalt
is unweathered, and 35 per cent of the total is composed of quartz grains, most of them
nearly 100 per cent angular. The material stopped by the 0.5 mm., 0.35 mm., 0.25 mm.
and o.177 mm. sieves is go per cent quartz grains. Sixty-seven per cent of the total sam-
ple is reworked loess.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 403
highest at the easternmost exposure, where they are 1,680 feet A.TI
Foreign pebbles are abundant in the silt at 1,500 feet A.T., about 8
miles above the mouth.?
No localized gravel deposit was seen at the mouth; but the valley
is a mile wide, and the glacial river channel it enters here is wide and
shallow. The conditions favoring a marked valley-mouth bar were
not present.
WILLOW CREEK VALLEY
Glacial waters crossed the divide between lower Union Flat
Creek and the minor subparallel Willow Creek valley on the south,
entering the latter in no less than five places. More than half the
length of this valley was traversed by glacial streams, only the upper
6 miles of its course escaping the great changes wrought by the in-
vading flood from the north. Yet the volume which followed the
Palouse, swinging around the western end of the original divide, was
so much greater that a bar was built in the mouth of Willow Creek
valley close to its junction with Palouse River. It is a larger and even
more striking feature than that in Kamiache Creek valley.
This strictly local great mound of gravel has a total vertical
range of 200 feet. It originally completely blocked Willow Creek val-
ley, and out in the middle of this valley was too feet thick. The bar
is nearly a mile wide (along the valley length). The length of the bar
lies across Willow Creek valley and extends somewhat up-valley on
the south side. At the north end the bar form is lost on the upper
slopes, where the deposit is a thick mantle of gravel that rises north-
1 The coarser constituents of this sample are almost entirely of basalt, and almost all
of this basalt is weathered. Yet coarse, angular quartz particles and one particle of
quartzite are contributions from glacial water backed up this valley. Some of the basalt
is but slightly weathered. Less than 4 per cent of the total sample was stopped on the
first two sieves; 7 per cent passed all sieves; and 12 per cent passed all but the finest
sieve (0.074 mm.). This fine material, as in previous sievings, is essentially loess. The
altitude here is 140 feet higher than the scarp bases on minor loessial islands in scabland
about a mile below the entrance of Union Flat Creek, and 75 feet higher than scarp bases
at Winona, 5 miles north of the entrance. This is further evidence that the surfaces of
the glacial rivers were somewhat higher than the bases of the loessial scarps. Though
this makes more difficult any precise reconstruction of the surface gradients of these
scabland streams, it strengthens the case for great volume.
? Fifteen per cent of this sample is stopped on the I mm. screen. More than half of it
is foreign material, granite and greenish quartzite predominating. Much of the basalt is
weathered. Seventy-three per cent of the total may be called loess.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


404
J HARLEN BRETZ
ward to 1,380 feet A.T. about roo feet below the nearby scarp base.
On the south side the gravel deposit extends up to about 1,420 feet
AT.
Two distinct ridges with a constructional sag between them stand
on top of the bar where crossed by the highway. Cuts through these
ridges show complicated depositional structures that are very dif-
ficult to explain in detail, though they clearly record a tumultuous
flow of water out of Palouse Valley and back up Willow Creek across
the top of the bar. The material is mostly angular basalt cobbles and
pebbles with subordinate amounts of coarse, black or gray basalt
sand. There are some definite strata and irregular lenses of fine sand
and silt. Some of the finer material is cleanly sorted and stratified,
but some is charged irregularly with grains of coarse basaltic sand."
Beds of well-stratified gray sand in one place dip eastward up Willow
Creek at angles ranging from 22° to 35°. These beds rest with steep
contacts on the edges of the nearly horizontal stratified basaltic
gravel. Close to the contact, the stratified sand dips 35°. About 6
feet farther east, out in the sand, the dip is go°; and in another 6 feet
to the east, the dip is 22°. Overlying this foreset sand bed is a suban-
gular basaltic gravel, also foreset and dipping about 20° to the east.
Minor distortions in the sand foresets show that there was some
slumping during aggradation, or soon afterward, but the inclination
of the beds as a whole is not due to any slumping. Vigorous shifting
currents in the great eddy back into the mouth of Willow Creek are
shown in the diverse character and stratification of the débris, in the
steep contact of these dipping beds on nearly horizontal beds, and in
the other erosional surfaces shown in the section. It must be remem-
bered that all this is on top of the bar deposit, at least too feet above
the floor of Willow Creek valley.
In the upper part of this valley, east of the entrance of glacial
waters across the divide from the north, silt terraces are recognizable
for a mile or so. This is the same pebbly and sandy silt already de-
scribed for other valleys and contains bits of quartzite, granite, and
'This pebbly silt appears to be identical with that in the valleys upstream from the
scablands. The extraordinary mechanism that produced the intimate intermixture of
coarse and fine material seems to have operated at times during the deposition of this
bar.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 405
other foreign rock.' None of the material was found higher than
1,550 feet A.T. The nearest scarp base whose altitude is known is
about 3 miles up the scabland gradient at 1,540 feet A.T. Certainly
the bar described is a constructional form which blocked Willow
Creek valley; certainly its total vertical range is 200 feet; certainly
its summit was swept by strong currents out of the main scabland;
certainly Willow Creek contained backwater at this time; and cer-
tainly the bits of fresh granite and unweathered basalt in the terraces
farther up Willow Creek did not come down that drainage way.
All the valleys thus far considered are tributaries of Palouse
River, though only one (Lancaster Creek) enters that river east of
the scabland. All the streams immediately south of Union Flat
Creek, except Willow Creek, enter the canyon of the Snake; and only
through it do they open into scabland. The huge glacial river entered
the valley of Snake River across a wide tract of scabland whose east-
ern edge is close to Riparia. Examination of the astounding features
recording glacial backwater in the Snake and its tributaries will be-
gin at Riparia and will be extended up that drainage way as far as it
has been studied.
SNAKE RIVER VALLEY AND ITS TRIBUTARIES
There are enormous mounded gravel deposits in Snake River
canyon near the junction of Palouse River where the glacial flood
entered from the north. They may be traced eastward up the north-
ern side of the Snake almost to Riparia. The deposit is thickest (260
feet) near the entrance of the Palouse and thinnest (150 feet) at the
eastern end, but there is no definite progressive lowering of altitudes
up the valley for the 5 miles of its extent. One minor gulch draining
from the northern wall of Snake River valley was dammed by this
deposit to a depth of at least 1oo feet and has subsequently cut a nar-
row ravine through the gravel. A comparison of the ravine slopes
1 Two samples, collected a mile apart, one at 1,500 feet, the other at 1,550 feet A.T.,
show very similar characters. One is 75 per cent loess; the other, 67 per cent. Three and
six-tenths per cent of the material in one is composed of particles larger than I mm; 7.4
per cent, in the other. Both contain vein quartz and greenish quartzite, one yielded a
fragment of mica schist. Basalt particles dominate in the coarser screenings; some much
weathered, some very little altered. In both there is an increase in the percentage of
angular quartz particles down at least to the o.147 mm. sieve.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


406
J HARLEN BRETZ
and the broad rolling surfaces of the deposit shows how little the
original topography of the gravel deposit has been modified by run-
off.
The débris for this rude terrace-like deposit came from the north
in considerable quantity directly over the eastern part of the basalt
wall against which the deposit rests. In several places it filled, or
nearly filled, pre-existing minor gulches descending this wall, making
remarkable features that look more like very long narrow gravel fans
than anything else. But each fill is traceable up to scabland surfaces
at about 1,000 feet A.T., and each contains non-basaltic débris like
that already noted in the valleys to the north. There is nothing like
these gravel-filled ravines in the Snake Valley above the entrance
of the scabland river.
In structure, this Riparia "terrace" is largely composed of the
long deltaic type of foreset beds, and these foresets dip prevailingly
up the Snake. There are erosional contacts between many members,
very irregularly distributed throughout the deposit, and with no sug-
gestion whatever of weathering of the eroded surfaces. A number of
striking lens-shaped bodies of silt and sand are present, apparently
fillings of channel pools. Some of these lenses are without a trace of
lamination, though 18-20 inches thick.
The composition of the gravel is mostly basalt, though the per-
centage of non-basalt is higher than for the deposits already de-
scribed north of the Snake. The non-basaltic material is almost all
very well rolled, whereas that in the valleys farther north is com-
monly angular or subangular. Quartzite material in the plateau
gravels is prevailingly bluish and greenish, whereas quartzite in
the gravel of Snake River valley is prevailingly white and yellow.
Very suggestive of the source of these well-rolled fragments of light-
colored quartzite is their abundance in the Snake River gravel now
in transit.
ALKALI FLAT CREEK VALLEY
This stream enters Snake River about a mile upstream from the
eastern terminus of the "terrace" just described. For several miles
back from the mouth of this tributary valley, it is narrow and deeply
cut into the basalt. For about a mile back from the Snake this can-
yon has a coarse basaltic sand deposit in terrace remnants, 75-100
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 407
feet above the Snake at low water. The sand contains a few pebbles
of angular basalt. The only foreign pebble found was a whitish
quartzite. The deposit is very well bedded in foresets, the beds dip-
ping 14 in the plane of the section across and up the canyon. No
other high terrace sand or gravel was seen farther up this valley. But
at Hay, which is 12 miles from the Snake, and for 5 miles farther up-
valley, are silt deposits to a maximum altitude of 1,290 feet A.T.-
60 feet higher than the coarse sand deposit. The depth of the silt is
slight and sections are poor, but the characteristic abundant grains
of basalt and a few particles and pebbles of foreign material are read-
ily recognized."
Eastward, above 1,300 feet, the valley for several miles has ba-
saltic gravel in the streamway, and much loess has been washed
down the slopes and along the valley. Yet this combination of basalt
and loess in transit does not yield the tiny angular particles and
coarse grains of country rock disseminated through a loessial allu-
vium. And of course it does not possess foreign particles. No trace
of the pebbly, gritty silt was found above 1,300 feet A.T. This figure
is approximately the upper altitude of the loess scarps at the junction
of Snake Canyon and scabland. This same statement can be made
for almost all the other valleys thus far described, though some do
not have the basaltic stream gravel from which the tiny particles
might conceivably originate. Where basalt fragments are mingled
with loess in valley alluvium, they are larger than in the silts, are all
1 Four samples of this silt were collected at intervals along a 5-mile stretch of the
valley floor, distributed through an altitude range of 300 feet. The coarsest material,
stopped by the 1 mm. sieve, ranges from y per cent to 18 per cent of the total; while the
finest part of the samples, the reworked loess, ranges from 61 per cent to 83 per cent of
each total. Basalt dominates the 1 mm. and o.71 mm. screens; most of it rusty in color
and distinctly weathered, none of it really fresh. None of the basalt is rounded. Foreign
rocks and mineral fragments, all angular, include feldspar, quartz, porphyry, granite,
and quartzites of whitish, greenish, and brown colors. The feldspar grains are clean
cleavage fragments that show no evidence of weathering under a magnification of fifteen.
There is an abundance of quartz grains on all sieves down to o.147 mm. Since go per
cent or more of all loess sieved passes o. 147 mm., these larger quartz grains are probably
a contribution from the glacial waters, not a local derivative. The weathered condition
of most of the basalt in these samples seems to indicate local derivation from slopes of
weathered basalt. Associated fresh rock fragments show that the basalt has not weath-
ered since deposition. In analyses of silts considerably nearer the Snake, a great deal
of the basalt content of these silts apparently is unweathered and surely is much less
weathered.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


408
J HARLEN BRETZ
weathered, and are commonly arranged in strata. Nowhere do they
have associated foreign particles.
CENTRAL FERRY
This place is at the crossing of the Inland Empire Highway,
about 25 miles by river above the mouth of the Palouse. Two tribu-
tary valleys enter the Snake here Deadman Creek from the south
and a small unnamed creek from the north. The mouths of both
these tributary valleys contain remarkable mounded gravel deposits,
well exposed in pits opened for highway material.
The deposit in the mouth of Deadman Creek begins 1,000 feet
back from the Snake and extends about * mile farther upstream on
the east side of the valley. It constitutes a half-mound resting
against the higher basalt slope. The top of the half-mound makes a
bench-like form So feet above the creek. There are many basalt out-
crops through the thin soil immediately above the flattish top. The
deposit is composed chiefly of basaltic rubble, nearly 100 per cent
angular, very irregularly bedded but possessing distinct foreset
strata in places, the dip of which is away from the Snake and up
Deadman Creek, or partially up this valley and partially toward the
basalt slope against which the deposit rests. Several angular grani-
toid boulders occur in the deposit. Two of them are of a rather strik-
ing granodiorite porphyry, one being 3 feet in diameter. Boulders
and cobbles of this rock, or a porphyry so closely similar to it in
megascopic and microscopic characters that no distinction can be
made, have been found in several main scabland channels on the
plateau. They are all subangular. None of this rock has been found
in the rounded pebbles and cobbles now being transported by Snake
River.
No other deposits of gravel well above the stream have been
found farther up Deadman Creek. But the peculiar silt deposit is
conspicuous in many road cuts for 9 miles up the valley, and an
unweathered erratic cobble was found half a mile east of Gould,
nearly 14 miles from the Snake, and 1,215 feet A.T. The silt is imper-
fectly stratified and poorly sorted. It is full of tiny pebbles and large
sand grains composed chiefly of basalt but containing a few non-
basaltic particles, unweathered. The silt deposit nowhere shows the
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 409
development of a soil profile or a weathered upper zone. This is true
throughout the entire region. It is to be contrasted with the common
exposure of both A and B horizons in cuts in the loess above the
level of the silt.
From the terraces along the lower part of Deadman Creek it
appears that the silt originally completely covered the valley floor to
a depth of 1o feet or more. But it also extends up on the slopes above
the terraces. Low spurs of basalt, projecting out into the terraces,
carry about the same thickness of silt as is found in the terrace sec-
tions. And along the Inland Empire Highway up a tributary to
Deadman Creek a few miles south of Central Ferry, the same silt
with the same characteristic unweathered coarse material scattered
through it and the same kind of imperfect stratification is exposed in
many places. It reaches an upper limit of at least 1,200 feet A.T.I
At this level the silty deposit lies on unusually steep slopes, 200 feet
or more above the nearby valley bottom, and 60o feet above the
Snake at Central Ferry. In other words, the silt is a mantle which
originally lay on all slopes up at least to 1,200 feet here and whose
thickness on the steep upper slopes is not much less than in the valley
bottom. Its deposition was so recent that weathering has not af-
fected it and slope wash has not removed it. Certainly there has been
no deepening of the valleys east of the scabland since this mantle
was deposited.
The tributary entering Snake River from the north at Central
Ferry carries a mounded gravel deposit in its valley mouth. It also
1 In the sample from this altitude, most of the coarser material is non-basalt. Schist,
micaceous quartzite, green quartzite, intergrown quartz and muscovite, clear quartz,
two kinds of granitoid rock, and two kinds of gabbroid rock are represented. One of the
gabbro-like pebbles is clearly smoothed and striated on two sides. Some of the quartz
grains contain intergrown bits of biotite projecting from the exterior. Much of the ba-
salt in the sample is so much decomposed that it crushes in the tweezers, but some of the
chiplike forms are so slightly altered that the knife leaves glistening steel marks on their
sharpest edges. There are almost no rounded forms in the coarser grades obtained by
sieving this sample. Angularity of shapes is very pronounced. The proportion of quartz
increases in each sieve sample down to o.147 mm., where it is 5o per cent. About go per
cent of the total sample is loess.
In contrast with this reworked loess is the undisturbed loess about 100 feet higher.
Ninety-nine per cent of it passed every sieve. The 1 per cent stopped on the sieves was
composed of calcareous aggregates of the loess.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


4IO
J HARLEN BRETZ
lies about 1,000 feet back in the tributary valley and on the east side.
Similarly, also, it is a half-mound in shape and has a benchlike flat-
tish top. The top is 6o feet above the adjacent stream channel and
185 feet above the Snake. It has been undercut by the tributary and
gashed by several gullies, but there is no difficulty in differentiating
these steeper erosional slopes from the original mound slopes.
The stratification of this deposit is very irregular. There is defi-
nite foreset bedding in some of the cobbly débris, the beds dipping
up the tributary, or toward the east wall, or somewhere between
these two directions. Most of the material is basaltic rubble, very
little worn to 1o0 per cent angular. Sorting in certain parts has made
a few beds of well-stratified sand; but the bedding in the sand itself
is irregular, and contact of the sand lenses with angular cobbly débris
is also very irregular. Some of the sand is foreset with the dip up the
tributary, like that of the coarser débris. Subangular boulders of
granite are present, and there is one of the porphyry. There are n-
merous well-rounded pebbles of non-basalt like those so common in
the present gravel of Snake River.
The deposit shows weather-staining only in the upper few feet.
The granite and diorite boulders are fresh and unstained. So are the
more worn basalt fragments. Yet the associated very angular basalt
boulders are stained on all sides. It seems possible to explain these
weathered surfaces in the midst of unweathered material only by as-
suming that they were weathered when contributed. Their marked
angularity then can only mean that they are locally derived, that
they traveled a very short distance. They cannot be explained as
berg-carried like the angular erratics, for none are glacially worn or
abraded, none occur stranded with the erratic boulders at high alti-
tudes or on gentle slopes, and no basalt has been found in the definite
berg "nests" or patches of berg-laid till that are yet to be described.
They could not have fallen into the foreset strata; they must have
been carried with the rest of the débris back into the valley mouth.
No other gravel has been found farther up the tributary, except
close to the valley bottom. But there are many sections showing the
pebble-charged silt up to about 1,200 feet A.T. The black basaltic
sand in many places is distinctly segregated into irregular pockets in
which there may be as much sand as silt. They possess finger-like
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 4II
projections which penetrate the surrounding silt in various direc-
tions."
There are no sections in unconsolidated material for about half
a mile upstream from the 1,200-foot contour crossing. At I,300 feet
A. T. is a good section of fine-textured material resting on basalt, but
it is simply clean loess with hardly a particle of basalt and none of
any other kind of rock in it.? Essentially every road cut farther along
the highway for 25 miles all of it well above 1,300 feet A.T. shows
the same characters. The upper limit of the anomalous silt is close
to the altitude of the scarp bases where the enormous glacial river
entered the Snake near Riparia.
Snake River valley itself at Central Ferry contains a gravel
deposit as extraordinary as those back in the two tributary mouths.
At the highway crossing, the valley floor is a mile wide. The river
here is against the south wall and down in a trench about 6o feet
deep. The mile-wide floor is the surface of a gravel fill. In it are cuts
for 22 miles along the Camas Prairie Railroad, which closely follows
the north side of the river. Seen from the highway bridge, the gravel
in the north bluff of the trench is stratified, the beds prevailingly
horizontal and composed of well-worn stream pebbles and cobbles,
apparently simply a fill of Snake River débris, into which the stream
is now trenching. But in the next few paragraphs the reader will find
that this deposit is so highly abnormal that no large valley deposit
ever previously described can be cited as even similar to it.
In the first place, the surface of the deposit rises 75 feet north-
ward from the bridge to the mouth of the unnamed tributary from
' A sample was taken at 1,175 feet. Eleven per cent of it stopped on the I mm.
sieve; 62 per cent passed all sieves. Several bits of rock foreign to this tributary were
found among the particles exceeding o.5 mm. in diameter. Most of it is basalt; some
fresh; some rusty red in color and capable of being scraped into a clayey powder. Quartz
grains were found on all the coarser screens, some of them with intergrown mica and
feldspar. The quartz content increases from 1o per cent on the o.5 mm. screen to 50
per cent on the o.177 mm. screen.
2 Contrast this sample taken at 1,300 with that of the pebbly silt at 1,175. Of the
total, 2.5 per cent was stopped by the first 9 screens and to per cent by the .74 screen;
87.5 per cent passed all screens. The material on the first o screens consisted of much
decayed basalt with irregular shapes that can best be described as "crumbs." Though
angular, they differ notably from the cleanly fractured outlines of most of the basalt
in the pebbly silt. A very few quartz grains were found on the coarser screens. The
color of the finest material in both samples is almost the same.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


4I2
J HARLEN BRETZ
the north. Here the main valley deposit constitutes a broad ridge
lying across the minor valley mouth, though 4o or 50 feet lower than
the top of the semimound back in this tributary mouth. The tribu-
tary has cut a narrow gulch about 25 feet deep through the gravel
ridge, just as Willow Creek, Kamiache Creek, and other streams
have done where they enter scabland. It has also widely aggraded
its own floor immediately upstream from the blocked entrance. The
surface of the broad gravel fill, traced down the Snake Valley, de-
scends gradually to river level in about 2 miles, so that there are no
cuts along the railroad. The same descent of the surface and conse-
quent vanishing of the cliff along the river occurs upstream also.
This is no terrace profile, either across the valley or along it. The
surface is decidedly undulatory, but not in terms of gullies or ravines.
It is a huge, flattish half-mound, and it has been deposited as such,
not eroded to this shape.
In the second place, the structure shown in the railroad cuts is
almost without exception foreset up the Snake. The foreset structure
is shared by the coarse gravel, the fine gravel, and the sand in the
deposit. Not every stratum of each textural grade shows it, but most
of the material (except lenses and strata of silt) does. Only two
places were seen east of the bridge where the gravel has downstream
foresets, and perhaps eight or ten lenses of the finer constituents pos-
sess downstream dip in their layers. The foreset gravel is arranged
in nearly horizontal members, with as many as four such members in
vertical sequence. One member may be only a foot in thickness; an-
other may be ro-12 feet thick.
In the third place, the deposit, though dominantly of far-traveled
Snake River gravel, contains almost unworn cobbles and boulders of
local basalt. They are grayish, brownish, greenish, and reddish on
the outside, typically like the weathering colors shown along joints
in quarries of the region. They break readily along other joint
cracks, showing similar colors when opened. Yet the material with
which they are associated is essentially all fresh. The percentage of
basalt among the cobbles and pebbles of the deposit is small, but it is
classifiable into rounded fragments that are clean, bright, and hard,
and angular fragments that are dull and decayed. The angular frag-
ments average larger than any of the rounded basalt pieces. Some
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 413
boulders are 3, 4, and even 5 feet in maximum length, very much ex-
ceeding in size any fragments of non-basalt or any fragments of well-
worn basalt.
The deposit contains coarse sand or fine gravel which is almost
black in color because so highly basaltic, and is apparently identical
with that found in the backwater silts described in this paper. It also
contains strata and lenses of buff-colored silt or very fine sand, from
a few inches to a few feet thick. Both occur from the top well down
toward the base of the railroad cuts. But the intimate intermingling
of the particles of coarse black sand in the loess-textured silt was not
seen.
Basalt as a constituent of this Snake Valley deposit at Central
Ferry is much more prominent in the highest portion, near the north-
ern valley wall. In road-cuts half-way between Central Ferry and
Purrington, it is almost all basalt sand and gravel, with minor fore-
sets which dip both upstream and downstream. The deposit here is
piled up against the basalt cliffs like the two half-mounds in the
tributaries entering at Central Ferry. Yet it is only the more pro-
nounced upper part of the great flattish half-mound crossed by the
highway at Central Ferry.
In the fourth place, there is a definite relation between the alti-
tudes on this deposit and those at which the two tributary valley
mouth deposits stand. Each of these deposits is piled up approxi-
mately 50 feet higher than the top of the nearest part of the great
deposit in Snake Valley. Yet the increase in altitude of the great
deposit northward across the width of Snake Valley brings the base
of the northern tributary's deposit higher than the top of the Dead-
man Creek deposit. Each of these minor half-mounds obviously
was built with reference to the nearby surface of the larger, lower
deposit.
It is too much to expect that the foregoing very brief description
can convey an adequate picture of these deposits in their setting.
But if one will rapidly review the more striking features, such as the
strictly localized half-mound constructional forms, the altitudes in-
volved, the slight amount of erosion and weathering of the deposits,
the foresets dipping upstream in three diversely oriented valleys, the
large fresh boulders of granite and porphyry, the very angular,
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


4I4
J HARLEN BRETZ
stained basalt boulders embedded in unstained gravel and sand, the
associated silt mantle on higher slopes with coarse grains of fresh
basalt sand and pebbles of non-basalt disseminated through it, the
65o-foot vertical range of this silt, the close approximation of the
upper limit of the silt with that of the scabland where the Snake en-
ters that tremendously scoured topography, and the similarity of
most of these features with those from Kamiache Creek south to the
Snake, he must admit that the explanation of a great rush of berg-
charged glacial water up the Snake could ask for little else in the way
of record. Can any other explanation or group of explanations take
care of all these items? Does any reader know of valley deposits else-
where than on the Columbia Plateau which have similar features?"
VICINITY OF PENAWAWA
This town is y or 8 miles up the Snake from Central Ferry bridge.
The station altitude is 613 feet A.T. Deposits similar to those just
described are here also. The deep valley of Penawawa Creek up at
least to 1,100 feet A.T. contains the silt, with bits of fresh basalt and
small pebbles of granite and other rocks foreign to the valley.? A
1 The glacial-flood hypothesis itself encounters difficulties in explaining this Central
Ferry deposit. (1) The silt lenses tell of minor local pauses in current followed by re-
newed transportation of gravel up the valley. (2) A borelike wave moving up the valley
would be succeeded by deepening water, and with increasing cross-sectional area of the
reversed current; a decreasing velocity would maintain the same advancing wave. The
gravel deposit, therefore, should be the product of only the vanguard of the flood. Could
it conceivably have been so produced? (3) It seems questionable that a body of water
adequate to make this up-valley current could, in terms even of the scabland-flood hypoth-
esis, be poured across the Palouse-Snake divide near Riparia. (4) Most of the foresets
are composed of Snake River débris, which by this explanation represents a pre-existing
deposit torn up and relaid. Since no remnants of such older deposits show beneath the
anomalous foreset-bedded gravel, and since it is impossible that older gravel could be
completely torn out and its material rearranged and redeposited where the preflood
gravel lay, it must be assumed that (a) a large basal part of the half-mound is of older
débris, (b) the reworked material with added basaltic boulders covers the edges of the
earlier deposit, partially filling the trench or inner valley of the preflood Snake, and (c)
the dominant basaltic material constituting the apex of the broad mound is a contribu-
tion from valley-wall erosion and covers the surface of the older deposit.
2 Six per cent of the sample from 1,100 feet A.T. was stopped by the I mm. sieve; 64
per cent passed all sieves. Though there is plenty of non-basalt in the three coarser
grades, they are dominantly of very sharply angular basalt particles. Some particles are
from two to five times as long as they are wide or thick. The sharp edges of many are hard
enough to take a steel mark from the knife blade. The proportion of quartz, also with
marked angular outlines, increases to 6o per cent in material stopped by the o. I 77 sieve.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 415
quartzite pebble was found at about 1,200 feet A.T., but nothing ex-
cept loess and basalt were found above this altitude. The silt is
thicker in the lower part of the valley, and in some sections the
deposit is clean basalt sand. No mounded form of gravelly débris
was seen in the valley mouth; but about a mile west of the railroad
station, in a small gulch at Penawawa High School, there is a remark-
able deposit of this character with foreset strata dipping back into
the tributary out of Snake Valley. This deposit extends at least 325
feet above the Snake and originally must have nearly filled the gulch.
Some parts of the deposit are composed wholly of cobbly débris, very
little worn, all basalt, all with vari-colored surfaces of the original
joint-plane weathering, all rudely foreset back into the little gulch.
Other parts are composed of well-sorted, worn pebbles, also foreset
toward the walls of Snake River canyon, i.e., back into the gulch.
Thirty feet below the top of the deposit is a large cobble of the por-
phyry, definitely in place as a part of the extraordinary fill. In the
lower part of the sections is 20 feet of coarse basaltic sand with shal-
low foresets arranged much like a huge pile of overlapping saucers
tilted in the same direction. These dip out toward the Snake but
surely are not a deposit of the local drainage. They record an eddy in
some deep current flowing along the master valley. The débris of the
fill is almost wholly basaltic and, though indubitably deposited by
river currents, is quite unlike the normal Snake River gravel. The
angular stained cobbles clearly were derived from the slopes and not
from the bottom of the Snake Valley.
Cuts along a road up the south wall of Snake River canyon, 2 or
3 miles east of Penawawa, show the silt with numerous black basalt
grains, some of them grouped in pockets, and with a few non-basalt
pebbles and grains up to 1,200 feet A.T., about 6oo feet above the
river. No trace of such material was found above this altitude.*
1 Two samples were taken here one from the common phase of the pebbly silt
at 1,200 feet and one from a pocket containing coarser material at 1,175 feet. The higher
sample contained only 5-7 per cent of material larger than o.5 mm.; while 9 per cent of it
stopped on the o.074 mm. sieve, and 73 per cent of it passed all sieves. The varied for-
eign material is unweathered and unstained, though the associated basalt particles are
soft enough to scrape down readily under the knife blade. There is the increase in per-
centage of quartz with increase in fineness of material (40 per cent on o.177 mm. sieve)
common to the coarser screenings of all this silt. The sample from altitude 1,175 feet has
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


416
J HARLEN BRETZ
At the foot of this road-grade is Rice Bar, a large fill of gravelly
waste in Snake River valley. It is half-mound in shape, its profile
along the contact with the valley wall being a rude vertical arc, each
end coming down gradually almost to river level. Its surface against
the wall is nearly 100 feet higher than at the brink of the 2o-foot river
scarp at its northern margin. In this scarp the material is largely or
wholly of well-rolled Snake River gravel. The section does not show
structure. The surface of Rice Bar is undulatory. One undulation is
a broad ridge paralleling the Snake and standing about 25 feet higher
than the surface between it and the valley wall to the south.
In the highest part of the deposit, essentially against the basalt
walls, a ro-foot excavation shows only well-stratified, black, fine
gravel, more than 99 per cent basalt. It contains no slope-wash dé-
bris of loess or of fragments of weathered basalt, such as should occur
if this half-mound were an alluvial fan in part. It is a river deposit,
though certainly not composed of typical Snake River débris or dat-
ing back to a time when Snake River canyon was 100 feet less in
depth. In the dominance of basaltic sand on top and the dominance
of Snake River gravel in the basal part, Rice Bar duplicates Central
Ferry Bar.'
Another half-mound deposit, known as Miller Bar, lies a few
miles downstream from Rice Bar. It is very similar to Rice Bar and
also stands about 100 feet higher along the southern wall of the can-
yon than at the brink of its low river-cut cliff. Here, as in Rice Bar,
its higher portion cannot be interpreted as talus or alluvial-fan ma-
7.7 per cent of its material exceeding I mm. in diameter and has percentages ranging
from 2.g to 8.3 for the next eight finer sieves. Twelve and a half per cent was stopped on
the o.074 mm. sieve and 43 per cent passed all sieves. Chiplike forms of the basalt par-
ticles are common, some with hard edges and black color. Grains of quartz increase in
proportion to other constituents through the first six sieves, amounting to 40 per cent on
screen o. 177 mm. Grains of unweathered feldspar were found, also grains of quartz with
hornblende and biotite partially embedded.
1 The shapes of fragments are extraordinarily angular. They include sharp-edged
chips, and splinters in which the conchoidal fracture surfaces are unworn. A few bits of
quartzite and flakes of mica were found. Quartz grains are more common in the finer
grades of this sand, but their percentage is low. Half of the sample was stopped by the
1 mm. sieve; about a half of the remainder was caught on the o.71 mm. sieve; and about
half of what passed this sieve was stopped by the o.5 mm. sieve. Nothing reached the
0.104 mm. sieve.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 4I7
terial. Several small tributary gulches from the canyon wall mouth
along its upper margin, but between them the deposit is as high, or
is even higher, though not of talus débris or with talus forms. There
are talus piles everywhere along here for comparison, and they are
easily distinguished from the high edges of these bars.
ALMOTA CREEK
No mounded deposit constricting the mouth of this tributary was
identified, but for a mile or so back the pebbly silt shows in road-
cuts, associated with pockets and lenses of clean sand. The silt con-
tains foreign particles and angular bits of fresh basalt. Along the ser-
pentine road up the canyon wall, north of Almota, are numerous
foreign pebbles and cobbles. They are most abundant close to 1,250
feet A.T. One flattish cobble was delicately but definitely striated on
both sides. A large cobble of the granodiorite porphyry lies at about
1,000 feet A.T.
In the canyon of Little Almota Creek, a small erratic boulder at
goo feet A.T. is the highest record of glacial water found well back
from the Snake.
WAWAWAI CREEK
A deposit composed largely of basaltic sand has been opened on
the lower slopes back in the mouth of this valley. Its summit is about
230 feet above the Snake. Only the upper 10-15 feet are exposed in
the section. It has no characteristic Snake River débris, though for-
eign particles are present. Though now constituting a spur out into
the valley mouth, it is probably but a remnant of the fill which is
recognizable in rude terraces farther back up Wawawai Canyon.
These terraces are composed of the pebbly and gritty silt, with asso-
ciated well-sorted sand layers up to about goo feet A.T. Unsorted or
but poorly sorted silt occurs up to about 1,200 feet A.T. It contains
pebbles of granite, gneiss, schist, quartzite, etc. A fragment of the
porphyry was found at 1,16 feet A.T., and a three-foot boulder of
coarsely crystalline basic lava still higher.
ALPOWA AND SILCOTT
At Alpowa there is a definite half-mound, though considerably
cut away by the Snake along the upstream side. It has an alluvial
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


418
J HARLEN BRETZ
fan built out on it, but below the fan it is composed of worn river
gravel. Its summit is 175 feet above the Snake.I
Alpowa is just within the deep canyon-like valley that leads out
of the capacious Lewiston structural valley. Silcott is just above the
head of this canyon, at the debouchure of Alpowa Creek. East of
Silcott for a mile extends a mid-valley hill of gravel, its summit 830
feet A.T., about 130 feet above the Snake on the north and go feet or
so above an empty channel or fosse on the south. The elongated hill
has an undulating surface which descends gradually westward and
southward, being highest next to the river. If there is anything defin-
itive in its form, it is a bar, not a mid-valley terrace remnant. The
only exposure is in an old pit at the east end. The material here is
horizontally bedded, well-rounded unweathered river gravel, 24 per
cent Columbia River basalt. In it are large angular weathered boul-
ders of basalt.
The drainage of Alpowa Creek, entering the Snake at Silcott,
comes entirely from the basalt plateau. Yet about 1o miles up its
valley, 1,125 feet A.T. and 300 feet above the summit of the mid-
valley hill, is a granite boulder 2 feet in diameter, embedded in peb-
bly silts along the Inland Empire Highway. These silts, a few feet in
thickness, contain bits of granite, quartzite, etc., though their pebbly
content is chiefly angular basalt fragments.? One striated non-basalt
pebble was found. This deposit constitutes rude terraces in the
creek valley below the 1,000-foot contour crossing. It establishes the
1 Foreset beds dipping up Snake River valley have been seen at three other places
than those described: (r) at Ridpath station, about midway between Riparia and Cen-
tral Ferry, (2) 4 miles east of Almota, and (3) 2 miles east of Wawawai. They were noted
only from a passing train. No foresets dipping downstream were seen.
The collection was made a little below 1,300 feet A. T. in the highest road-cut which
showed the pebbly silt.
Twenty-two per cent of the sample was stopped by the 1 mm. sieve. Fourteen per
cent passed all but the o.079 mm. sieve, and 42 per cent passed all sieves. The material
retained on the 1 mm. sieve consisted of a few pebbles and a large number of coarse
grains. The pebbles (maximum diameter, 1½ inches) were all foreign and all unweath-
ered. The coarse grains were almost wholly basalt. The knife-edge, applied under a
magnification of ten, left shining streaks of steel on the sharp edges of some of these
pieces. Other pieces yielded readily under the knife. Angularity of almost all fragments
is very marked, though some of the larger foreign pebbles are subrounded. The propor-
tion of bits of quartz increases from a few pieces on the coarsest sieve to 6o per cent on
the o.1rr mm. sieve. As previously pointed out, this quartz is too coarse to be a deriva-
tive of the loess and surely does not come from the basalt.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 4I9
presence of a water body up to this level and of berg-ice floating in
that water. There were no local valley glaciers in the region. The
only alternative sources for berg-ice are the headwaters of the Clear-
water or the Salmon or the Snake itself. According to Lindren, the
valley glaciers of the Clearwater Mountains were very limited in ex-
tent and did not descend below 4,000 feet A.T. The termini of such
valley glaciers were from 50 to roo miles farther upstream than this
1,300-foot ponding could possibly reach. According to Lindgren's
map, only granite, quartz-monzonite, diorite, and gneiss constitute
the glaciated tracts of these mountains. He says that the "granite
shows great constancy in its petrographic character" and that the
quartz-monzonite so closely resembles the granite that "the two
kinds of rocks cannot easily be distinguished in the field." The er-
ratic blocks distributed up to 1,300 feet throughout the Snake and its
tributaries represent a considerable variety, megascopically, of gran-
ite and granitoids, gabbros, porphyries, fine-grained lavas, quartz-
ites, argillites, slates, schists, and gneisses. The evidence of the por-
phyry has already been cited. It seems impossible that the berg-ice
of the Snake Valley ponding could have come from the glaciers in the
Clearwater Mountains. And bergs from glaciers at the head of Snake
River would have traveled 575 miles from the mountains of western
Wyoming and eastern Idaho to reach the ponded tract.
VICINITY OF THE SNAKE-CLEARWATER JUNCTION
Lewiston, Idaho, and Clarkston, Washington, are built at the
junction of the Clearwater and Snake rivers in the lowest part of the
Lewiston syncline. In the bottom of the structural valley the two
rivers at their junction have probably not eroded more than 200 feet,
and this they have done concomitantly with the erosion of Snake
Canyon westward from Alpowa and Silcott.
The town and orchard tracts of Clarkston, Washington, are lo-
cated on a sloping terrace-like fill composed of sand and gravel with
prominent deltaic foresets. The deposit is a broad semimound rest-
ing against the southwest wall of the valley, its surface descending
1 W. Lindgren, "A Geological Reconnaissance across the Bitterroot Range and
Clearwater Mountains in Montana and Idaho," U.S. Geol. Survey, Prof. Paper 27
(1904), p. 116.
2 I. C. Russell, "Geology and Water Resources of Nez Perce County, Idaho,"
U.S. Geol. Survey, Water-Supply Paper 53 (1901), p. 70.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


420
J HARLEN BRETZ
from the highest part roughly 50 feet per mile, down the valley,
across the valley, and up the valley. Its upstream margin has been
cliffed by undercutting of the Snake. This semimound is an impos-
sible shape for a terrace top or a delta top, and the slopes are far too
steep for either feature in a valley as broad as the Snake. There is
no tributary drainage entering here from the higher land to the
southwest, to which it might be referred as an alluvial-fan deposit.
Pits in several places afford some idea of the nature of the mate-
rial. Two different deposits underlie the tract: an older stained and
weathered gravel beneath an unweathered younger deposit in which
Columbia basalt constitutes about 80 per cent. A group of exposures
along the Snake in the southern part of the Clarkston semimound
show dominantly dark unweathered fine angular gravel (Fig. 2)
whose beds are inclined at various angles, some as steep as 35°. These
foresets dip south, up the Snake. There are many erosional uncon-
formities in the deposit here, developed by shifting bottom currents
during deposition and promptly filled with beds which conform to
the erosional surfaces, like a stack of shallow bowls in section, the
upper bowls progressively broader and flatter. The fine gravel con-
tains large lenses and strata of yellowish silt and fine sand. Some of
the silt is well sorted; some is charged with irregularly dispersed
angular bits of rock; chiefly fresh basalt. In most respects, this tex-
ture duplicates the pebbly silt already described from Kamiache
Creek valley south to the Snake and back in the valleys of half a
dozen tributaries of the Snake.* Three small angular boulders and
one angular pebble of the porphyry were found here.
1 Though this mixture of coarse sand, fine sand, and silt is apparently identical in
structure with the high-level pebbly silts, it differs somewhat in texture and composi-
tion. The percentages stopped on the first five sieves range from 9 to 12.4, making the
cumulative curve much steeper for these grades than in any pebbly silt thus far exam-
ined. Correspondingly, the quantity passing the o.074 mm. sieve is unusually low-only
20 per cent of the total. Most of the material on the coarser sieves is very angular ba-
salt. Most of this basalt is unweathered, a condition to be expected, for the sample was
obtained nearly 30 feet below the surface. But a considerable number of basalt frag-
ments are well weathered, crumbling between the tweezer blades or becoming clayey
material when scraped with a knife. Such weathering must have occurred before the
deposit was made. There are no large pebbles of foreign rock in the sample, though non-
basalt is present. The proportion of quartz on each of the sieves increases from I or 2
per cent on the o.71 mm. sieve to 50 per cent on the o.177 mm. sieve. The finest material
is essentially loess, like all the high-level occurrences.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 421
The summit material of the Clarkston semimound is composed of
the familiar pebbly silt and coarse black sand. The silt is found up
to 1,050 feet A.T. on the steep slope descending from the Clarkston
Heights bench to the Clarkston semimound. A "nest" of angular
bouldery fragments of non-basalt was found at 1,175 feet A.T. on
Fig. 2. -Chips, splinters, slivers, and broken-rounds from the Clarkston half-mound
the eroded slopes of the bench, the material quite unlike the high-
level gravel, and apparently a berg deposit made subsequent to the
erosion of the bench.
The residential section of Lewiston is built on a gravel terrace
which rises steeply 50-roo feet just south of the business section.
Numerous excellent exposures show dominant deltaic forests dip-
ping northward, down the Snake or across the Clearwater. The ma-
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


422
J HARLEN BRETZ
terial is grayish or yellowish but not markedly weathered. It is typi-
cal rolled river gravel and distinctly unlike the gravel, sand, and silt
of the Clarkston deposit. Exposures in the top of the terrace, how-
ever, show none of this underlying gravel. There are many shallow
cuts and every one examined shows tan-colored silt and fine sand,
irregularly stratified, containing tiny angular fresh basalt pebbles
and a few non-basalt fragments, but totally lacking in rounded peb-
bles and in gravelly strata. In the eastern part of the city, 20 feet or
more of the light-colored sand and silt, with a few pockets and strata
of coarse black sand, are shown resting on the older gravel beneath.
A few layers of the sand and silt have numerous tiny angular pebbles
and large angular grains of fresh basalt, partially arranged in strati-
form fashion.
The surface of this younger deposit of the Lewiston terrace de-
scends steeply to the south into a minor erosional valley which leads
westward to the Snake. This steep margin is crenulated, and the
width of the minor valley is variable in terms of the lobes and re-
entrants. The southern slope of the valley, however, is gentle, and
its ground plan is regular. There are no crenulations in it. The flood
hypothesis considers this southward slope, with lobes into an older
erosional valley, as the lee face of a bar. The valley is in part a fosse.
A mile or so south of the Lewiston terrace, the surface rises in the
southern wall of the structural valley to the Lewiston Orchards tract,
1,400 feet A.T. and 700 feet above the Snake and Clearwater. Cuts
along the highway up this wall show the silt and sand with abundant
fresh basalt particles and some angular erratics to 1,225 feet A.TI
A pocket of angular erratics was found at 1,200 feet, and an angular
granite fragment 16 inches in diameter at 1,225 feet. This is the
highest known exposure of the pebbly silt in the Lewiston region. It
Little foreign material was found on the 1 mm. screen, but it is varied. Both
weathered and unweathered basalt occurs, the knife-sharp edges of some basalt splinters
and chips being perfectly fresh. The quartz content of each sieve sample mounts from
less than 5 per cent on the coarsest (I mm.) to 6o per cent on the o.147 mm. screen.
? Thirty-three per cent of this sample was stopped on the first two sieves, and 32 per
cent is the sum of that passing all sieves or stopped by the finest. The larger pebbles
(It inch maximum) are all of non-basaltic rock. Granite, schist, and quartzite are rep-
resented. The material on all the coarser sieves is largely of very angular fragments, in
which chips, splinters, and slivers of rock are common. Quartz constitutes 40 per cent
of the material on the o.177 mm. sieve, most of it being in exceedingly angular frag-
ments.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 423
has basalt particles essentially as fresh as those taken from the pebbly
silt embedded in the Clarkston halfmound. Yet these particles occur
nearly 5o0 feet higher on the walls of the Lewiston Valley and only 4
or 5 feet below the surface, while the material from the pit was taken
about 30 feet below the surface.*
TAMMANY HOLLOW
Tammany Creek is a small perennial stream entering the east
side of Snake River, nearly 5 miles south of the junction of Clear-
water River. It has a valley flat a quarter of a mile or so in width for
several miles above the mouth. But in a fashion strikingly reminis-
cent of Kamiache Creek and similar to many other tributary valleys
already considered, the mouth is blocked by a barrier of gravel
nearly 100 feet high. Through this the creek has cut a very narrow
gorge at the contact of the gravel deposit and the northern basalt
wall.
This barrier is a broad ridge of gravel nearly a mile long, lying al-
most wholly outside the mouth of Tammany Hollow, but extending
I We may admit that these erratic cobbles and boulders up to 1,300 feet A.T. in
Snake River valley came from the Cordilleran ice sheet, yet deny that the episode was
an extraordinary flooding. It is pertinent now to inquire whether their known distribu-
tion in the Snake drainage may be a test of the flood hypothesis. The alternative ex-
planation, it will be recalled, is that scabland was made by glacial drainage of several
different Pleistocene epochs, that the earliest of these occurred when the streams east of
scabland "were flowing at levels far above their present courses," and that notable val-
ley deepening by normal stream erosion has occurred during this succession of Pleisto-
cene epochs. The stranded erratics of Snake River drainage are highest above the valley
floors nearest its entrance into scabland. It must be assumed under the alternative ex-
planation that this height, about 800 feet, is the sum of two quantities: (I) the depth of
the earliest flooding and (2) the amount of subsequent valley-deepening. By this alter-
native the two quantities might be estimated at 1oo feet and 7oo feet, respectively. How
far up this early Pleistocene Snake River valley, 7o feet less in depth than now, would
a ponding extend which was only 100 feet deep at the mouth of the Palouse? Only as
many miles as the gradient in feet per mile is contained in 100. The present gradient of
the Snake here is about 24 feet per mile. It was probably steeper at an earlier stage in
valley development. A roo-foot ponding today would produce backwater for only 10
miles up the Snake. Is it possible that the gradient of the preglacial Snake was so low
that the erratics stranded at 1,225 feet A.T. above Lewiston, 70 miles upstream from
the scablands, were transported here during the earliest rational flooding?
To wait for another glacial epoch will be equally difficult, for we are committed to a
considerable deepening of Snake Valley in the meantime, larger fractions of the total
deepening being logically assignable to the earlier interglacial epochs. Indeed, it is im-
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


424
J HARLEN BRETZ
completely across that valley mouth from one headland to the other.
The summit of the barrier is nearly 1,050 feet A.T., about 250 feet
above the Snake. From the summit the slope toward the Snake is
relatively gentle, that facing up Tammany Hollow is steep. There
are no gravel terraces in the Hollow. At mid-length this barrier con-
sists chiefly of long deltaic foresets. They dip in that utterly anom-
alous fashion noted repeatedly in this study, directly out of the Snake
Valley and up the tributary valley. The material is dominantly fine,
dark-colored gravel; the pebbles, exceptionally angular and chiefly
of Columbia basalt (Fig. 3). But there are plenty of cobbles and
boulders in these foresets. Most of the boulders are composed of
much-decayed basalt buried in the almost perfectly fresh finer débris.
To complete the picture, one needs only the unsorted pebbly silts
and some stranded angular erratics farther back up the gulch behind
this barrier. There are no good cuts to show the presence of the silt.
Only loess and alluvium and basalt ledges show. But an angular
granite boulder, a foot and a half in diameter, and an angular cobble
of the porphyry were found about a mile east of the barrier dam.
In summary, the relatively broad Lewiston synclinal valley, at the
head of the canyon that extends from Alpowa almost to the Co-
lumbia River, contains the following aberrant depositional features:
possible to get bergs very far up the Snake at any time by this mechanism. It is impos-
sible to carry the upper limit any farther upstream than the intersection of that high-
water line (about 1,300 feet A.T.) with the vanished floor of the early Pleistocene Snake
River canyon. It cannot intersect the present floor. By this hypothesis it is equally im-
possible for any but the latest high-water line to intersect the present canyon floor,
though as the gradient of the deepening Snake River valley decreases, each succeeding
flood will reach somewhat farther up the valley. The upstream limit of foreign berg dé-
bris must, by this hypothesis, be a descending gradient. This it is not. Only a Snake Val-
ley system of full present depth at the time of glacial backwater will provide the existing
horizontal upper limit of berg-carried débris to the distances up-valley that are already
known.
Final establishment of this thesis will be made when the Snake and Clearwater val-
leys have been studied where the upper-limit contour crosses them. In most of the val-
leys entering scabland from the east, this flood-carried débris has already been found up
to, but not above, the crossing of the proper contour.
Other serious objections to this alternative hypothesis include (r) the lack of widen-
ing of the Snake Valley during this deepening, the lack even of notable slope wash or
gullying, which would remove the earliest high-line records; (2) the lack of weathering
in the high-lying stranded erratics; and (3) the lack of decay in the tiny chips of basalt
so abundant in the silt at all altitudes below the highest limit.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 425
A. Silts:
I. Pebbly and coarse sandy silts occur in the bottoms and mainly on the
slopes of both main and tributary valleys, extending up nearly or quite to 1,300
feet A.T., 6oo feet above the Snake at the Clearwater junction.
2. The abundant particles of coarse sand and small pebbles occurring in the
silts are irregularly disseminated or in pockets; rarely stratiform.
FIG. 3. Chips, splinters, slivers, and broken-rounds from Tammany Hollow Bar
3. These larger particles are dominantly of basalt, but there is everywhere a
small percentage of non-basaltic material back in valleys draining wholly from
basalt country rock.
4. Most of these particles are very angular and are unweathered. The lack
of weathering is as conspicuous at the upper limits as in the valley-bottom oc-
currences.
5. The material of this silt is identical with the loess of the plateau top and
the gentle valley slopes of the region.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


426
J HARLEN BRETZ
B. Sporadic boulders:
I. Angular boulders of unweathered granite and other non-basalts occur
stranded alone, or embedded in silts, or in gravel, at all altitudes below the upper
limit of about 1,300 feet A.T. The granodiorite porphyry boulders and cobbles
in this class probably are derivative from the scabland glacial rivers.
2. Angular boulders of local basalt, commonly much weathered, occur in
gravel deposits of fresh material in the valley bottoms.
C. Gravel deposits:
I. Mounds and half-mounds, 100-200 feet thick, composed largely of ba-
saltic gravel, occur on the floor of Snake Valley.
2. One such mound, elongated with the main valley, once constituted a com-
plete barrier at least 1oo feet high across the mouth of a good-sized tributary
valley.
3. Structure of these mounds, where exposed, contains foresets, inclining in
various directions with the varying slopes of the mound. There is one marked
case of foreset dip up the Snake, the location being nearer the middle than the
wall of the valley. In another case, the dip is directly out of the Snake and up a
tributary.
4. The material of these mounds is largely unweathered; but contains frag-
ments up to boulders in size which are much weathered.
5. There are seams and lenses of light-brown silt in the gravel, some with
the same irregularly disseminated sharp bits of basalt and non-basalt that the
silts themselves carry.
D. Relation to the regional topography:
1. The silt, foreign boulders, and gravel deposits are very young.
a) They lie on erosional slopes where any notable amount of valley deepen-
ing or widening would inevitably remove them.
b) The foreign boulders, and the unweathered pebbles in the silt, lying high
up on these slopes, cannot date back to early stages of valley development.
c) Gravel deposits, which once were complete barriers to tributary streams,
are still almost intact.
2. The silts, foreign boulders, and gravel deposits record some abnormal
episode of flooding.
a) Unweathered materials ranging from fine basalt sand to large foreign
boulders cannot be distributed through this amazing vertical range, the fine
débris essentially as a blanket on all gentler slopes, by any ordinary sequences in
valley history.
b) The absence of such records everywhere above 1,300 feet A.T. indicates
this altitude as the approximate upper limit of the flooding. Above it the surface
deposits are loess or basalt rubble. The basal portions of the loess commonly
have angular fragments of weathered basalt, but no foreign material and no
fresh basalt particles. Nor is the loess rudely stratified; nor does its rare ba-
saltic débris occur in pockets.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 427
3. That abnormal episode of flooding involved strong currents in all valleys.
« Extreme angularity of the basaltic débris records pounding and batter-
ing, rather than ordinary abrasive grinding, to produce it.
b) Erratic material in long, narrow canyons could hardly have floated back
unless the episode were very long continued. Current transportation seems
necessary if the time interval be short. Other evidence, already cited, indicates
brevity of time involved.
4. The current of that abnormal flooding was, in every valley, exactly the
reverse of the normal drainage which made these valleys and which now re-
occupies them.
a) Erratic boulders were berg-floated back into tributaries from the Snake
and were berg-floated up the Snake from the scablands.
b) Erratic débris was mingled in suspension with silt (the rehandled loess)
and deposited in many cases without assorting.
c) Foresets of the gravel deposited during this episode in significant places
dip back up the valleys. Eddies will not account for such dip.
d) If a mechanism be provided by which the flood water could have come
from the headwaters of the various valleys, or of even only the major ones, there
certainly should be an ascending upper limit with increasing distance upstream.
If it is 1,300 feet at Riparia, it should be considerably above 1,300 feet at Lewis-
ton and Clarkston, 65 miles farther upstream. No such rise is indicated. There is
only loess and weathered basalt above this level.
5. There was in no case any outlet for these currents in the direction in which
they flowed. The only conceivable cause for these reverse currents, in the light
of all data now in hand, was an extraordinary volume in the scabland rivers and
an extraordinarily rapid rise to the maximum of that volume.
[To be concluded]
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:47:43 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VOLUME XXXVII
NUMBER 6
THE
JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY
August-September 1929
VALLEY DEPOSITS IMMEDIATELY EAST OF THE
CHANNELED SCABLAND OF
WASHINGTON. II
J HARLEN BRETZ
University of Chicago
TRIBUTARY VALLEYS OF THE CLEARWATER AND
THE SNAKE ABOVE LEWISTON
The indicated depth of glacial flood water at Lewiston and
Clarkston shows that, if the writer's hypothesis be correct, more
records of this same character should be found up the Snake and
the Clearwater to the crossing of the 1,300-foot contour- and no
farther. The writer's study has not yet demonstrated this. There is,
however, some more evidence to present.
The lower canyon of Potlatch River, a tributary of the Clear-
water, contains a rude, dissected terrace whose frontal edge stands
about 30 feet above the valley floor. It is composed of light tan-
colored silt and sand, fairly well stratified though with undulatory
contacts and some variation in thickness. In pockets and seams, and
indistinctly stratified through some of the layers, are multitudes of
coarse angular grains of basalt. Scattered sporadically through the
silt are angular foreign pebbles and cobbles. In one section there
are at least twenty fragments of the granodiorite porphyry, all
grouped closely though aligned with the stratification. The largest
fragment is 8 inches long. The altitude of the group of fragments is
985 feet A.T. It lies nearly roo miles up-valley from the scablands.
505
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


506
J HARLEN BRETZ
At the mouth of Asotin Creek, 5 miles south of Clarkston, is a
terrace whose surface is 950 feet A.T., 140 feet above the business
district of the town of Asotin. The material in the upper part of the
terrace is almost wholly coarse black sand, without lenses or strata
of silt or fine sand. The material of the coarse sand is largely very
angular, unweathered basalt. Its bedding is of the saucer type of
current foresets, the laminae dipping toward the Snake. This is
close to the southern wall of the creek valley. Traced out into the
Snake Valley, the bedding of this continuous deposit, lower in the
section, is of long deltaic foresets which dip up the Snake. Still
lower and farther out the material is chiefly yellowish silt and sand,
though with beds of the coarse black sand.
The deposit lies wholly on the south side of the tributary mouth.
The large creek surely has removed much of it, and there may have
been, originally, a duplicate of the Tammany Hollow bar here.
There is no possibility of deriving all this fresh angular basaltic sand
from the Asotin Creek valley. There is plenty of old weathered
basalt gravel up the Asotin which should be present in the deposit
if the débris came down the creek. There is no possibility that Asotin
Creek or Tammany Creek or any of the many other streams with
constricting valley mouth bars could have built these forms. The
shallow forests dipping out into the Snake and up the Snake are
logical structures for a huge eddy in the up-valley current, an eddy
determined by the tributary mouth on the outside of a sharp curve
in the course of the Snake.
Farther back up Asotin Creek valley are the characteristic silts,
with an unusually large percentage of fresh angular fragments of
granite, diorite, porphyritic lava, quartzite, schist, etc. A granite
boulder 2 feet in maximum diameter lies at an altitude of about
1,000 feet A.T., at least 250 feet above the Snake.
The mouth of Ten-Mile Canyon, its name indicating its distance
above Clarkston, contains a large portion of a gravel bar. It is 225
feet from bottom to top, and the summit is 1,025 feet A.T. It is
much gullied, but its original form is still very well preserved. So
far as pits and road cuts show, it is composed of foresets which dip
back into the tributary valley mouth from the Snake and also dip
southward down the northern wall of the tributary valley. Numer-
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 507
ous large boulders of weathered basalt lie on the eroded slopes of the
bar and are embedded in its gravel, boulders which were torn off the
northern shoulder between the tributary and master valleys by the
same current which built the deltaic foresets down this northern
wall. This current up the Snake swept across the shoulder at an
altitude certainly 300 feet above the base of the deposit to which it
contributed.
About 8 miles farther up the Snake is the mouth of Couse
Canyon. In it lies another one of these extraordinary local gravel
deposits. It extends 175 feet from bottom to top, but rests against
the sloping northern wall of the valley and nowhere is very thick.
But, like the other deposits, it is a definite shoulder built out into
the tributary valley. It also contains large boulders of weathered
basalt buried in the much finer debris whose basalt content is largely
fresh. No structure is exposed. The top of this bar is 975 feet A.T.
The discovery of Couse Canyon bar was made just at the close
of the field season. With it came the discovery of a feature as ex-
traordinary as anything yet listed, a feature whose diagnostic value
obviously is great. There was no opportunity at this late date, how-
ever, to apply it to the many gravel deposits already studied.
The material of this bar is strikingly angular and at first glance
appeared to contain no pebbles with rounded shapes. When sought,
these shapes were found, though their percentage is very low. But
three out of every four pebbles with rounded surfaces turned out
to be only chips or splinters or perhaps halves of originally rounded
pebbles. The remainder of the outlines are distinctly angular or sub-
angular and sharply truncate the curves of the rounded side.
To check this feature with present Snake River gravels, two
nearby bars now swept in flood time were examined a bar com-
posed chiefly of large cobbles and a bar without cobbles. In the
cobble bar, the associated pebbles among the interstices can move
only when the cobbles are in transit. They should, therefore, suffer
the maximum of pounding by larger fragments which the Snake is
capable of affording, except perhaps in rapids. Less than 3 per cent
were broken-rounds, and there were almost no angular shapes. In
the bar without cobbles, broken-round pebbles (up to 2½ inches in
diameter) constituted 12⅔ per cent of the total. Essentially all else
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


508
J HARLEN BRETZ
was rounded. Most of the fractured surfaces on all of these Snake
River pebbles have been notably abraded subsequently. In the
Couse Canyon bar, most fractured surfaces are ragged and hackly,
indicating deposition promptly after the breaking.
FiG. 4. Broken-round pebbles from Couse Canyon Bar
Though this was the last gravel deposit investigated in the field
study, three "mine-run" collections of angular gravel had already
been made one from the Clarkston semimound, two from the
Tammany Hollow bar. These have yielded broken-rounds of identi-
cal character. In the Clarkston collection, 1.4 per cent of the pebbles
are rounded on all surfaces, 5 per cent are broken-rounds, and 93.6
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 509
per cent are completely angular. In the two collections from Tam-
many Hollow bar, rounded pebbles constitute o.3 per cent and I.o
per cent, broken-rounds constitute 3-7 per cent, and 6 per cent, and
completely angular forms make up 96 per cent and 93 per cent of
the total.
The screening of silt samples taken from Snake River valley and
its tributaries has also vielded broken-rounds in so per cent of the
collections, some samples revealing 5 or 6 such forms on the I mm.
sieve. Several specimens showed a dull polish on the rounded out-
lines and a minutely hackly surface on the fractured surfaces.
The data on these valley-mouth heaps of gravel are now nearly
all before the reader. The writer believes that these deposits are
unique, and that only a unique episode can explain them. Up-valley
currents of great depth and great vigor are essential in that explana-
tion. But as through currents, they are utterly impossible. If glacial
water backed up the Snake from the scabland rivers, and if it
possessed the current indicated, no descending gradient of the valley
floor can be held responsible. The gradient must have existed in the
surface of that flood. The writer, forced by the field evidence to
this hypothesis, though warned times without number that he will
not be believed, must call for an unparalleled rapidity in the rise of
the scabland rivers.
TUCANNON RIVER VALLEY
This tributary to Snake River enters the larger stream from the
south less than 4 miles above the entrance of Palouse River from
the north. Scabland extends at least that far up the Snake, and the
Tucannon therefore is considered as having a separate entrance into
the glacial river-channel system. Opening directly toward the great
rivers which poured into the Snake from the plateau to the north,
this fairly capacious valley would, according to the flood hypothesis,
receive a considerable flow back into it. There are great accumula-
tions of gravel along its slopes near and at the mouth, but no valley
mouth bar exists. Heavy gravel veneers on the west wall of Tucan-
non valley at Starbuck, 5 miles south of the Snake, extend up at
least to 750 feet A.T. Foreset bedding in the deposit is oriented in
various directions. The material is 95 per cent basalt. Non-basalt
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


510
J HARLEN BRETZ
pebbles are well rounded, but the basalt pebbles are essentially all
angular or subangular.
The southernmost deposit of this scabland gravel in the Tucan-
non is about 7 miles up from the mouth. It consists of a few feet of
FIG. 5.-Broken-rounds from several samples of the high-level pebbly silts in Snake
River valley.
black sand and fine gravel, overlying stratified silts, current-bedded
up the Tucannon, and containing a few foreign pebbles. It is low
on the valley walls. No gravel deposits in the Tucannon, lying above
the valley floor, are known farther up-stream, and in no way can the
deposits near the mouth be attributed to the local stream. They are
like the great bar deposits on the south side of the Snake opposite
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 51I
the mouth of the Palouse and a product of the same episode. There
is abundant evidence to support this statement farther up the
Tucannon.
The valleys of Tucannon River and its tributary, Pataha Creek,
have fairly wide floors for many miles above Starbuck. Though the
streams have considerable gradients (650 feet in 21 miles along
Pataha Creek from Chard to the Snake), the valley floors and the
valley slopes carry a heavy silt deposit below 1,300 feet A.T. None
Central
Riparia
-phard
табаттот Arror.
Porerou
raitsburg
Rulo "Hadley
MBIA
ID AHO
Palalla Walla
WASHINGTON
OREGOT
M
E S
FIG. 6.-Valley deposits immediately east of the channeled scabland of Wash-
ington II.
of this silt has been found above that altitude. Fresh highway cuts
are numerous from the Snake up to altitudes above 2,100 feet; and
this statement is based on a careful examination of most of them,
and a sampling of many."
Streams have trenched into this silt until it now constitutes only
terrace remnants in most places. The maximum thickness of the
silt is certainly more than 50 feet. The best exposures of the silt are
in highway cuts at the junction of Pataha Creek and Tucannon
" A sample of silt collected at 1,300 feet on the slopes of Tucannon Valley close to
the junction of Pataha Creek yielded 11.8 per cent material larger than I mm. in di-
ameter. Only one foreign fragment was recognized, a bit of granite. Though the basalt
which constitutes this high proportion of non-loessial material is too soft to take steel
markings, it is not notably weathered. Little of it is strikingly angular though a few
chiplike forms occur. The particles do not have the crumblike shapes that have been
found repeatedly for basalt particles in basal portions of the loess.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


512
J HARLEN BRETZ
River. Here the upper surface of the fill is 140 feet above Pataha
Creek, 1,020 feet A.T. It lies mostly in the upstream angle between
the two streams. The silt deposit at this junction and in the neigh-
borhood is not the poorly sorted or unsorted material which is com-
mon on higher slopes. Its stratification is irregular, with many
lenses, with irregular contacts, and therefore with variations in thick-
ness almost universal; but the sorting is good. In a 15-foot section,
there are ten repetitions of a sequence of fine gravel or coarse sand
below light-colored sand which grades upward into tan- or buff-
colored silt. The fine gravel is far from clean; perhaps to per cent
of its volume is silt. Some rhythm in the sedimentation is clearly
recorded. But the silt and sand is a deposit of glacial waters, or a
derivative of such deposits, for small fragments of non-basalt occur
in the fine gravel and a few cobbles of foreign rock are embedded
in it. The entire Tucannon drainage comes from the basalt. A little
above 1,300 feet, the loessial material on the steep slope above
Delaney contains pockets of fresh basaltic particles. There are no
foreign fragments here, but they are common about 100 feet lower
down this slope.
Many unweathered boulders of various kinds of foreign rock
have been brought to light by road grading, most of them from
shallow cuts. One fragment of the granodiorite porphyry, 2 feet
in maximum diameter, lies in Pataha Creek valley at 1,085 feet
A.T., 17 miles upstream from the Snake, and more than 500 feet
above it.
The silt terraces are less pronounced eastward up Pataha, and
they disappear near Chard, the whole valley floor being covered by
the deposit. Here the material is but little sorted and is charged
with pebbles and minute sharp bits of fresh basalt and foreign
rocks.' The highest trace of glacial waters found in Pataha Creek
valley was a cobble of granite a little east of Chard and nearly 1,300
I Eighteen per cent of the sample from Chard is stopped by the 1 mm. sieve. Nine-
teen per cent is stopped only by the finest sieve (o.074 mm.), and 35 per cent passes all
sieves. Most of the larger fragments on the coarsest sieve are non-basalt and therefore
foreign to this valley. To get here they must have traveled 21 miles up the Tucannon
and Pataha valleys. The finer material on this sieve is almost all basalt, very angular
and largely of fresh material. Knifelike edges of the chips will take a steel streak. The
proportion of quartz in the coarser sieves rises from a few grains on the o.71 mm. sieve
to 50 per cent on the o.177 mm.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 513
feet A.T. No silt was recognized here or farther east along the high-
way for 35 miles. But the divide between Pataha Creek and Alpowa
Creek is crossed in this distance and, descending to 1,300 again, the
silts and erratic boulders of Alpowa Creek valley are encountered.
A tributary valley entering the Tucannon from the south, a little
above the junction of Pataha Creek, carries the silts up at least to
1,225 feet AT., where they constitute terrace fragments. At the
junction of this tributary, the silt is 40 feet thick and the terraces
are well marked. Fragments of foreign rock occur in the silt at 1,225
feet, a mile north of New Hope."
Two north-flowing tributaries to the Tucannon, Kellogg Creek
and Smith Hollow, enter the main valley below the junction of
Pataha Creek. In the first named, a section 20 feet high occurs at
about 1,150 feet A.T. The lower 5 feet is old stream rubble and
gravel. The upper 15 feet is of silt or rearranged loess, showing
almost no stratification but containing seams and pockets of the
fine black gravel or coarse sand.?
In Smith Hollow, plenty of the pebbly silt is exposed in a section
in the valley floor at 1,140 feet A.T.3 Foreign pebbles were found
1 The description for the silt at Chard might be copied verbatim for this sample
except for percentages. Twenty-three per cent of this silt remains on the 1 mm. sieve,
34 per cent passes all sieves, and 18 per cent is stopped only by the 0.074 mm. sieve.
The following tabulation shows the abundance of quartz grains in the coarser grades.
o.50 mm.-1.6% of total sample -20% quartz 0.32% of total is quartz
0.35 mm.-4.0% of total sample -30% quartz r.2% of total is quartz
0.25 mm.-4.7% of total sample -50% quartz -2.35% of total is quartz
0.177 mm.-3.8% of total sample--60% quartz -3.38% of total is quartz
In these four sieve samples, more than 6 per cent of the total collection is composed of
quartz grains larger than any found in the local loess.
2 In a sample taken from one of these pockets, only two foreign fragments were
found on the 1 mm. sieve, both quartzite. Much of the basalt is in sharp angular pieces
whose edges will take marks from a knife blade. Associated with this unweathered
basalt are a few pellets of friable weathered basalt, readily crushed in the tweezers. On
the o.71 mm. sieve several grains of quartz were found which contain partially embed-
ded flakes of biotite. Eighty-six per cent of the sample passes all sieves.
3 Thirteen per cent of the sample from this place was stopped by the 1 mm. sieve,
20 per cent passed all but the 0.074 mm. sieve, and 52 per cent passed all sieves. Foreign
material on the I mm. sieve consists of quartzite, quartz-muscovite schist, feldspar, and
quartz. The curious mixture of much-weathered basalt and unweathered basalt, repeat-
edly noted, is found here also. The sharpest edges of some of these particles are hard
enough to take steel marks, yet the sample collected was only 3 or 4 feet below the
surface on a gentle slope.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


514
J HARLEN BRETZ
in the wash material along a road up the side of the valley here to
1,320 feet AT. The highest erratic was a fresh, coarse-grained
granite. Above that level there is only loess and basalt to the summit
of the divide.
It is 35 miles across the divide on the east between silts and
erratics in Pataha and Alpowa valleys, yet the upper limit is the
same in both. This is because the glacial waters which reached back
in each came from the same place, the entrance of the scabland flood
into the Snake. It is only 12 miles across the divide to the west
between silts in Tucannon drainage and in Touchet River valley, a
tributary to the Walla Walla; but silts in the Walla Walla nowhere
are known within 200 feet of the altitude reached in the Tucannon
and Snake drainage. The reason is precisely the same as for the
descending series of upper limits in Kamiache, Cottonwood, Lancas-
ter, Rebel Flat, Union Flat, Willow, and Alkali valleys the de-
sending surfaces of the great rivers.
It should now be clear that basalt grains are abundant in the pebbly silt
(reworked loess) up to 1,300 feet A.T. in the Snake River drainage east of the
scabland. It should also be clear from the almost universal presence of varied
foreign débris that the reworking of the loess and the introduction of the high
content of basalt grains was done by glacial water. Almost every sample has
yielded essentially unweathered sharp-edged particles of basalt intimately as-
sociated with much-weathered pebbles or crumbs of the same rock. The relative
proportions of fresh and decayed basalt, however, vary notably. The shapes of
the fresh and but little-altered particles are extraordinary. The chips and splin-
ters do not seem referable to abrasion by either streams or glaciers. Vigorous
percussion would yield these shapes, as it would produce the broken-round
pebbles found in 50 per cent of the silt samples and in several samples of bar
gravels. The writer's explanation incorporates this idea of percussion, deriving
the basaltic débris from local slopes swept by the rush of glacial backwater.
Some of this débris was already well weathered, and when fragmented did not
vield the riven shapes.
There are two other possible explanations for these basaltic particles in
the silt: (r) they may be the product of local weathering; and (2) they may have
been carried back up the Snake from the scablands. The first fails to agree with
the field evidence in several vital points and is rejected. The second demands
some mechanism for that transportation many tens of miles up the valley lengths
and many hundreds of feet up the valley slopes. The only mechanism which
seems feasible is berg-ice. Yet the definite berg deposits of the region do not
contain basalt. The ice moved so short a distant over on to the basalt plateau
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 515
that little, if any, of this material is to be expected. The foreign boulders and
cobbles and the larger foreign pebbles in the silt samples were undoubtedly
carried by floating ice, but the presence of the basalt does not seem satisfac-
torily explained by this procedure.
The writer is not yet satisfied with his explanation. There are two items of
the field evidence that do not seem to harmonize with it: (a) the abundance of
very angular quartz grains that obviously did not come from either loess or
basalt, and (b) the thorough dissemination of coarse particles through the un-
stratified phases of the silt. An attempt to understand this latter item is out-
lined in the next few paragraphs.
A sample block of the pebbly silt, several pounds in weight, mixed with twice
its volume of water, was stirred vigorously to get it all in suspension, and was
then allowed to settle. The coarser particles settled first. Only the finer sand
was found mingled with the silt. Several repetitions of this experiment, with
decreasing amounts of water, gave the same result so long as the material was
sufficiently liquid to take a plane upper surface when the current ceased. To
keep the coarser particles suspended in the fine, and thus to duplicate the inti-
mate mixture of all sizes in the original sample, it was necessary to so reduce
the quantity of water that the material was a mud sufficiently thick to hold
irregularities of its upper surface when stirring ceased. The pebbly, gritty silt
of these valleys east of channeled scabland is apparently a mud-flow.
The mechanism of a mud-flow seems utterly at variance with any picture
one may devise for the action of glacial water in these valleys. The mantle-like
character of the deposit on valley slopes suggests at once the alternative that
this intermingling of coarse and fine material is the product of soil creep and is
not an original structure at all. But before one concludes that the matter is
disposed of by this suggestion, he must explain the thick deposits of pebbly silt
on the very gentle slopes of valley flats and even on hilltops, and must account
for the undisturbed stratification of clean, fine sand both above and below the
problematical silt in some sections. Furthermore, this alternative hypothesis
must start with the fact that both erratic particles and sharply angular un-
weathered basalt particles lay on all these slopes before the postulated soil creep
could mingle with the loess. It therefore offers no escape from the idea of a
glacial flooding.
Experimental production of creep in the sample material has not been
successful. The quantity worked with was so limited that the influence of fric-
tion on sides and bottom of a trough extended throughout the mass. A duplica-
tion of the internal stresses involved in creep was impossible, and what really
was secured was a sliding. Yet with as little jarring as possible sliding in both
wet and dry material promptly produced a concentration of the coarser particles
in the bottom portion of the sample.
Reverting again to the writer's hypothesis, we may ask how an up-valley
surge can produce the mud-flow structure of this pebbly silt. The valleys cer-
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


516
J HARLEN BRETZ
tainly were not filled with mud to the upper limits of the turbid glacial water.
The silt (reworked loess) and probably the basaltic chips came from the local
slopes as the water rose; only the erratic material surely had to come in with the
glacial flood, and floating ice can be called on for this.
The mud mixture must, apparently, be considered a product of the agitated
marginal water of the rising flood, left in the deepening water with little further
disturbance. Some incipient assortment may record a little reworking, but
further additions to the deposit apparently would be sorted, and pebbly silt
above the stratified material seems to be debarred unless local subaqueous
slumping could produce it. It seems certain that if the pebbly silt and the gravel
deposits on the valley bottoms are of the same episode, the silt could not have
been deposited at the maximum flooding or during recession of the water; else
it would overlie the gravel.
The foregoing suggestions are very sketchy. There is no internal evidence
in the characteristics of the pebbly silt to support the flood hypothesis. The
most that can be said is that the silt is a product of glacial water, that battering
of basalt occurred somewhere to make the included coarse, angular grains, and
that the conditions of its deposition were extraordinary. The problem of its
origin probably will not be solved by consideration of its characteristics alone;
the silt must be studied in the light of the other extraordinary deposits of the
region.
WALLA WALLA VALLEY
The main current of the glacial flood across the scablands, after
entering the canyon of the Snake, followed it down toward the
Columbia. About 35 miles below the mouth of the Palouse, Snake
River passes to a relatively down-warped tract in which the canyon
walls disappear. In this tract, the Snake joins the Columbia. Like
all structural valleys with adequate outlet along the course of the
glacial rivers, it is an excellent place to test the hypothesis of great
volume. Without that volume there can be no high upper limit of
silts and berg-borne erratic boulders, for structural valleys on the
Columbia Plateau in Washington have not suffered any considerable
deepening by erosion. They are today essentially only the original
down folds. The hypothesis of several different epochs of great
valley-deepening since the upper bars or silts or scabland were made
is obviously inapplicable to a structural valley.
Flooding by glacial water occurred in this structural basin,
spreading out in a huge pond 75 miles long. A large part of the Walla
Walla drainage area lies in the depression; and glacial water extends
eastward up the Walla Walla from the Columbia, reaching in one
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 517
place within 12 miles of the Tucannon backwater. Due to the low
altitude of the district and the lack of notable canyons in it, most
of the divides of the Walla Walla basin were submerged by the wide
sheet of water. Hundreds of observations in all parts of this drainage
area show that the glacial water reached up to, but nowhere above,
1,100 feet A.T. Over the site of Walla Walla city, close to the eastern
limit of the flooding, it was 175 feet deep; and at the junction of
Touchet River, a major tributary of the Walla Walla, it was 650
feet deep. Since the drainage of the Walla Walla system is wholly
from loess and basalt, any other material in the sediments must be
a contribution from the Snake or the Columbia valleys.
EUREKA FLAT
A curious feature of the loessial hills which diversify the surface
of the Walla Walla region is their elongated linear shapes, trending
approximately N. 20° E., and their close spacing. Among these linear
hills between Walla Walla River and the Snake is an equally curious
elongated flat, several miles wide and nearly 3 miles long, sub-
parallel with the Snake and trending about 40° east of north. The
surface of this flat rises gradually from the southwest about Ir feet
per mile to the northern end, from which one can see the mouth of
the Palouse a thousand feet lower and 6 or 7 miles away.
Whatever the origin of these peculiar topographic features in
the loessial cover of the basalt, they control the minor horizontal
irregularities of the upper limit of silt and erratics. The topographic
expression of this low part of the Columbia Plateau, therefore,
antedates the flooding.
The lower part of Eureka Flat was inundated by water escaping
directly out of the Snake. The glacial silt 3 miles north of the town
of Eureka is more than 20 feet thick. It is composed chiefly of re-
worked loess, horizontally stratified, but contains many layers of
fine, light-colored sand and many pockets and strata of coarse basalt
sand, the grains angular and unweathered. The evidence of glacial
origin is found in hundreds of grains, pebbles, and cobbles, and in
a few boulders of a variety of foreign materials. Some of the cobbles
and boulders bear good striae. There are a very few thin seams of
gravel, in which foreign débris is prominent. Similar sections occur
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


518
J HARLEN BRETZ
both east and west of the town. But though the flat continues for
15 miles farther northeast, rising from 1,050 feet (the highest silt)
to 1,500 feet at the northern end, nothing except loess and basalt
were found on its floor.
TOUCHET VALLEY
The headwater creeks of Touchet River flow northward from
the northern spur of the Blue Mountains, uniting near Dayton and
Huntsville to flow westward for about 30 miles to the eastern margin
of Eureka Flat. The river, here 200 feet lower than the flat, turns
southward along the contact of Eureka Flat on the west and the
close-set linear hills on the east to enter Walla Walla River about 20
miles farther downstream.
The characteristic records of the glacial flooding occur in well-
marked terraces for 12 miles along the east-west stretch, extending
as far up as Prescott (1,038 feet A.T.). But east of a point about 2
miles beyond Prescott, the road cuts show only basalt and loess.
The loess is reddish or yellowish in color, intimately cut by seams
of lime and in some places full of closely spaced nodules of lime-
cemented loess.
Sections in the Touchet valley terraces show a gray silt full of
tiny black basalt grains and bits of foreign rock. Its thickness at
Shaw, about 2 miles east of the margin of Eureka Flat, is nearly 80
feet, the height of the terrace above the river. At Prescott, which
is essentially the upstream limit of the silt, the terrace itself consti-
tutes the highest of the deposit, about 1,050 feet A.T. At Shaw,
however, the terrace top is 890 feet, and the silt extends up the
lower slopes as a mantle to 1,020 feet, where the highest occurrence
of fresh basalt grains in the loessial débris was found. Two foreign
' Seventy-one per cent of the sample from this terrace has the texture of loess.
Six per cent is of particles too large to pass the 1 mm. sieve. In the coarser material
angular basalt is dominant, some of it fresh and some weathered. Particles of granite,
vein quartz, and quartzite are associated with the local rock débris. Quartz constitutes
5 per cent of the material on the o.71 mm. sieve, to per cent on the o.5 mm. sieve, 25
per cent on o.35 mm. sieve, and 5o per cent each on the o.25 and o.177 mm. sieves. Very
little of this quartz shows worn surfaces. A few cleavage fragments of feldspar were
recognized on the o.5 mm. sieve. In essentially all respects, this Touchet Valley silt
is like that described for Snake Valley.
Only 1 per cent of the sample taken here was stopped by the r mm. sieve, and 74
per cent passed all sieves or was stopped only by the finest one. The only foreign ma-
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 519
pebbles were found at 1,090 feet A.T., 4 feet down in the dust and
loose loess.
In its southwestern course along the margin of Eureka Flat,
Touchet valley was completely submerged by the glacial water, the
silt deposits lying back on the adjacent upland. As far down the
valley as Johnson's Bridge (6 miles upstream from Walla Walla
River) almost every cut in unconsolidated material exposes un-
stratified silt charged with pockets and disseminated particles of
rock, basalt greatly predominant. Near Johnson's Bridge are two
splendid exposures of the silt, each nearly roo feet high. In one the
lower 50 feet is composed of brown silt or fine sand, rather massive,
well sorted, and so coherent that it forms cliffs. There are a very
few pebbles of foreign material in it. No pockets or lenses of the
coarse basaltic sand were found, though there are a few lenses of
angular basaltic pebbles and cobbles. The upper 50 feet consists
of a weaker silt which does not maintain cliffs, which is more gray
in color, and which has plenty of lenses and pockets of tiny pebbles
and coarse sand grains." A few cobbles and boulders of non-basalt
terial consisted of the abundant quartz grains, some large thick mica cleavage frag-
ments, and one unworn cleavage bit of feldspar. Some angular grains of quartz on the
I mm. sieve contain mica flakes partially embedded in them. The dominant basalt on
the coarser sieves is subangular to subrounded. Much of the quartz is subrounded.
Both fresh and unweathered basalt are present, some bits with knifelike edges that take
a steel mark.
1 Fourteen per cent of the lowest of this pebbly silt is stopped by the 1 mm. sieve;
from 4.6 per cent to 6.8 per cent remains on each of the next seven sieves; and only 44.4
per cent passes the o.074 mm. sieve or is stopped by it. The coarsest grade contains
fully to per cent of foreign material, and it is in as small pieces as the go per cent of
basalt on this sieve. Most of the basalt is wholly unweathered and exceptionally angu-
lar. A few broken-rounds occur in this sample, mostly of foreign rock, which must
have been rounded, and probably were broken also, before being carried back into
the Walla Walla depression. The proportion of quartz on the six coarser sieves in-
creases from a few grains on the I mm. sieve to 50 per cent or 6o per cent on the
o.177 mm. sieve.
Whereas splintering and chipping of local basalt was apparently possible in the
back-rush up Snake River valley, that procedure does not seem probable here. There
was no opportunity for production of such a current here, nor were there numerous
basalt outcrops. The very sharply angular basalt of the Touchet valley silt seems best
explained as a derivation of the scablands themselves. It is difficult, however, to account
for their transportation here. Even though some basalt might be included in berg-ice,
it would hardly be limited to these grade sizes and these shapes, and it certainly would
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


520
J HARLEN BRETZ
are scattered sporadically through the silt. There is no really good
stratification in either member.
Another section, half a mile farther upstream, shows much the
same things. Light-brown, rather massive sand and silt underlies
brownish and grayish stratified sand and silt. Pockets and lenses
of coarse sand and small pebbles are rare in the lower brownish
member but common in the upper member. The stratification is
irregular and undulatory in detail and in the large. It seems to
record different times when the water here became more muddy and
then cleared up somewhat. But how are we to explain the currents
recorded by the coarse-textured basaltic sand containing particles
of foreign rock? And how explain the pocket form of much of this
aggregate? Some of these are as thick as they are wide; none are
elongated as thin strata. They might be explained as small masses
dropped from berg-ice; but lenses of such material, indubitably so,
are present in other sections in the Walla Walla valley and have such
strikingly different composition that this explanation apparently
must be rejected. Whatever the details of a final explanation may
be, it seems obvious that exceptionally turbulent and excessively
turbid water must be admitted.
Sections in the silt of Touchet valley south of Johnson's Bridge
show a great deal of stratification; and the extensive silt terraces
out in the open Walla Walla valley, shortly to be described, possess
a very uniform and regular stratification.
The area between Touchet River and Walla Walla River, ap-
proximately 15 miles wide, slopes southward toward the larger
stream. The divide runs subparallel with the Touchet, 300 to 500 feet
above it, and only about 2 miles south of it. Several minor valleys
in this gentle southern slope will now be examined.
DRUM-RULO VALLEY
The up-valley limit of silt in this unnamed drainage way is at
Drum station, 1,045 feet A.T. It has all the familiar characteristics so
frequently recited. But at 1,1oo feet, three-fourths of a mile north of
Drum, an excellent new section yielded nothing but gray loess with
not constitute go per cent of berg contributions. The finer foreign material in these
silts seems too thoroughly intermingled to have dropped directly from floating ice.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 521
nodular lumps." Southward from Drum, the little valley contains
terraces, the pebbly silt being recognizable in dozens of road cuts.
South of Thiel, this silt shows a stratification of irregular and un-
dulatory beds, but the sorting of sand from silt is very imperfect.
ENNIS-BERRYMAN-HADLEY VALLEY
The highest record of glacial water in this minor drainage line
was found on the valley bottom at 1,090 feet A.T., four-fifths of a
mile north of Ennis station. The evidence consists of a few pockets
of pebbles and grains containing foreign material.? At 1,100 feet and
above, along this valley way, only clean gray laminated loess is
exposed in the road cuts. Lest one think that these pebbly silts on
valley slopes might be outcrops of a formation between the basalt
and the true loess, it should be noted that half a mile north of Ennis,
at 1,070 feet A.T., a cut shows nodular loess beneath unstratified
gray silt with foreign pebbles and bits of bright basalt. Farther
along this cut in the valley slope, the silt disappears and the loess
I Three samples were collected in this vicinity one in the highest exposure of the
pebbly silt at 1,045 feet A.T., one a mile down the valley at 1,020 feet A.T., and one of
the undisturbed loess three-fourths of a mile up the valley at 1,100 feet A.T. Coarse ma-
terial is most abundant in the lowest sample. The loess itself has no coarse material,
and the contrast between its composition and that of the pebbly silt samples is the
universal contrast throughout all the country immediately east of scabland. Foreign
material in the pebbly silt includes granite, gneiss, quartzite, diorite, mica schist, and
vein quartz. Many quartz grains on the coarser sieves have embedded portions of
crystals of hornblende, mica, and feldspar.
? A sample taken at 1,090 feet A.T. has з per cent of its weight stopped by the
I mm. sieve, while 78 per cent either passes all sieves or is stopped only by the finest.
Another sample, taken a quarter of a mile farther down the valley, contains 10.5 per
cent of material too coarse to pass the 1 mm. sieve, while 6s per cent is stopped only
by the o.074 mm. sieve or passes that. This parallels the result obtained in a similar set
of samples in the Drum-Rulo-Thiel valley. Since the glacial silt of these valleys is not
sorted and has pockets and seams of coarser material, different samples from any one
place should not be expected to agree very closely. Collection was guided in all cases,
however, by the justifiable desire to have the anomalous composition most strikingly
brought out. These analyses therefore show the maximum amount of coarse material
in each place. It seems fair to conclude that there is less of it in the re-worked loess at
the upper limit of these narrow valleys. The sharp angular bits of basalt, common in
these valleys, are well above the top of the basalt formation, the valleys being wholly
in the loess. Like the foreign débris, these innumerable bits of basalt have been carried
up the valleys. There is plenty of fresh material in every one of the several samples
taken. There has been little, if any, weathering or erosion since the deposits were made.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


522
J HARLEN BRETZ
constitutes the entire exposure. The silt, therefore, lies in a valley
in the loess.
An instructive section a mile south of Berryman, at about 950
feet A.T., shows 15 feet of unconsolidated material above basalt.
The uppermost з feet or so is brown soil, probably in large part a
wash deposit from neighboring slopes. Below this is buff-to-brown
loessial material, unindurated, containing reddish streaks and
patches that are not far from horizontal. This buff-to-brown ma-
terial contains scattered sharp grains of basalt and foreign rock. One
seam especially well charged with rock bits is almost a coarse sand,
3 to 5 inches thick and several feet long. Below the pebbly brownish
silt or loess is reddish nodular loess to the underlying basalt. Closely
spaced, irregular, intersecting lime seams are especially prominent
in it. There is some calcareous infiltration in the pebbly silt-a rare
thing.
SPRING VALLEY
Terraces about 25 feet high, composed of the glacial silt, occur
in the lower part of this valley, their surface about 920 feet A.T.
along the road in section 17. A stream-cut bank here shows pebbly
silt, loess, and basalt, though not overlying each other in vertical
sequence. The loess is dark reddish brown, dense, hard, and highly
calcareous. It contains numerous irregular pebble-sized fragments
of weathered basalt, but no foreign material. The angularity is of a
quite different type from that possessed by the fresh basalt in the
glacial silt. The rock has been crumbled to make these pieces, and
the surfaces of the fragments are much pitted; while the fresh basalt
particles so frequently mentioned have been sharply and cleanly
broken as though by percussion. The adjacent silt is unstratified,
distinctly grayish, sandy, and friable. Numerous pebbles of quartz-
ite, granite, etc., are associated with the particles of unweathered
basalt. A granite boulder lies in the stream bed near this section.
1 The contrast in the quartz content of the two samples is worthy of emphasis.
The loess yielded a few grains of quartz on the o.5 and o.35 mm. sieves, about I per cent
on the o.25 and 3 per cent to 6 per cent on the o.177 mm. sieves. The silt adjacent to
this loess yielded numerous quartz grains on the 1 mm. and the o.71 mm. sieves, to per
cent on the o.5 mm., 40 per cent on the o.35 mm., and 50 per cent on the o.25 and 0.177
mm. sieves. This notable difference, repeatedly found in other samples also, indicates
introduction of the large quartz grains with the glacial water. But the sum of all ma-
terial on these six sieves was only 5.9 per cent of the total sample, and probably not
more than 2 per cent of the flood silt consists of such introduced quartz.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 523
On the divide between Spring Valley and Dry Creek to the south,
half a mile from the section, the same pebbly silt occurs at 1,050 feet
A.T.I
DRY CREEK
The main valley of this stream describes an arc of 120° about the
northern environs of Walla Walla, its radius approximately 6 miles
long, and that city lying at the center. Dry Creek receives the drain-
age of the three minor valleys just described. Being lower and more
capacious, it has more of the silt deposited by the glacial flooding.
No sections were available on the floor or lower slopes in the vicinity
of the 1,000 and 1,100 foot contour crossings; but where the valley
floor is about goo feet, the slopes on both sides carry the pebbly silt,
up at least to 99o feet A.T. on the south? and to 1,050 feet on the
north. A terrace fragment constituting a low mound on the valley
floor at 950 feet shows unstratified silt charged with tiny pebbles
and large sand grains of angular fresh basalt. Associated with them
are a few fragments of non-basaltic rock.
The deposit is much thicker a few miles farther down the valley.
Near Paul School, a cut 27 feet deep is wholly in the silt. Layers of
sand and silt alternate. Sharp contacts are more common than gra-
dations. The bedding is horizontal as a whole but has many minor
undulations. Few beds are more than 6 inches thick. Many layers
of silt are clean and well sorted; others are highly charged with coarse,
angular, black basalt grains. There are pockets of basaltic sand,
some clean washed, others with a matrix of the silt. There are lenses
of angular basalt gravel with many foreign pebbles.
From Paul School down Dry Creek valley, the silt deposit is so
heavy that nothing else shows. The present creek flat has been re-
excavated from an almost complete fill that was 50 feet or more in
I No pebbles of foreign rock were found in this sample. But the presence on the
coarser sieves of abundant basalt, some of it angular and nearly fresh, some weathered
and crumbling, and of quartz grains which reach a maximum of 50 per cent on the
o.177 mm. sieve indicate the action of glacial water. Furthermore, a cobble of the
granodiorite porphyry was found at this altitude on the slope.
2 Of this sample, 11.6 per cent was stopped by the 1 mm. sieve. It contained parti-
cles of mica schist, granite, quartz, feldspar, quartzite, and mica. The mica occurs in
large, thick pieces, not in thin flakes. Some of the quartz grains have mica partially
embedded in them. The proportion of quartz increases to so per cent on the o.177 mm.
sieve. Twenty per cent of the sample passed all sieves, 22 per cent was stopped by the
0.074 mm. sieve, and 27 per cent by the o.104 mm. sieve.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


524
J HARLEN BRETZ
depth. The low divide between Dry Creek and Mud Creek to the
south is entirely covered with the silt. The highest sections here are
950 feet and show only the silt. Indeed, this divide is a dissected
silt plain, the summits still holding flattish surfaces, a feature wholly
lacking in the loessial hills above 1,100 feet A.T. to the north and to
the east.
One section on this divide, near Sudbury, reveals a lens several
feet long and a foot thick, very highly charged with angular foreign
pebbles. Many of these fragments are well striated on different
sides, the marks crossing each other in the fashion typical of glacial
striae. No basalt was found in the débris. This lens certainly is not
of the category of pockets and lenses dominated by sharp angular.
basalt grains. It is underlain by well-washed fine sand and overlain
by pebbly silt. Both contacts are very sharp.*
The lens of coarse non-basaltic débris is interpretable only as a
mass of till. Associated small boulders in this and nearby sections
tell the same fact: that there was abundant floating glacial ice in
the water when the heavy silt mantle was deposited. Indeed, all the
coarser foreign débris back in all valleys described in this paper must
have been similarly transported. But in almost all cases, the foreign
material and the sharp pieces of basalt were mixed thoroughly with
the silt before coming to rest. For this mingling there must have
been some transportation after release of the foreign material from
the ice. And there must have been some method of transportation,
other than floating ice, to distribute the broken fresh basalt particles
so widely and so high on the pre-existing loessial slopes.
1 Of the sample from the lens, 77.3 per cent was stopped by the I mm. sieve. In all
this material, not one particle that could be referred to Columbia basalt was found.
Only one holocrystalline fragment was found, a granite. The material appears to con-
sist essentially of slate, argillite, and quartzite. Quartz grains range from 30 per cent
on the o.71 mm. sieve to 50 per cent on the o.25 mm. sieve. No basalt was found in any
of these grades. The fine product consists of 3.8 per cent stopped by the o.074 mm. sieve
and 9.8 per cent passing that sieve. Both the silt immediately below and that directly
above the lens are low in percentage of pebbles and coarse grains. Their coarser grades
all contain basalt particles. The quartz content on the o.25 mm. sieve is 40 per cent
in the silt above the lens and 6o per cent in that below. On the o.177 mm. sieve it is
50 per cent and 7o per cent, respectively. Fifty-eight per cent of the upper silt and 69
per cent of the lower are stopped by the o.074 mm. sieve or pass this sieve.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 525
VICINITY OF WALLA WALLA CITY
Before examining the great silt filling in the central part of the
Walla Walla valley, the eastern and southern margins will be con-
sidered. The city of Walla Walla is only a few miles from the eastern
limit of the large structural down-warp. A pronounced upwarp, con-
stituting a northern spur of the Blue Mountains, rises to summits
nearly 4,000 feet above the city, about 17 miles to the east. Numer-
ous creeks flow down the western slope, some to Touchet River,
some to Dry Creek, and some to Walla Walla River. Mill Creek, the
northernmost and largest of those entering Walla Walla River, has
built a large fan in the eastern part of the depression, on which it
divides into several distributaries. The head of this fan is about
1,400 feet A.T., and it descends westward about 8o feet to the mile.
Walla Walla is built on this fan, altitudes in the city ranging from
goo feet in the west to 1,050 feet in the east.
The glacial pebbly silts with foreign rock fragments overlie the
lower part of this fan, except along the stream ways, and extend
eastward to upper limits of about 1,080 feet A. T. A small cobble of
the granodiorite porphyry was found at I,roo feet, about a mile east
of the city limits. But farther east, nothing except dust, reddish-
brown loess, basalt and basalt gravel have been found on the slopes
of the Walla Walla drainage basin.
The relations of the glacial silt and erratics to the Mill Creek fan
make it clear (I) that some portions of the fan have not been worked
over since the flooding, (2) that the fan in the valley and the canyons
on the upwarp long antedate the flood, and (3) that the warping
which made the canyons and the fan possible was still earlier. This
sequence must not be neglected in evaluating any proposed explana-
tion for the distribution of the silt and erratics in Walla Walla
valley.
Another fan, built by the south fork of Walla Walla River, lies
in the general region of Milton and Freewater, Oregon. It blends
with the Mill Creek fan near Walla Walla. It apparently has been
completely worked over since the episode of glacial water, for no
traces of the silt deposit were found on it. The region, however, has
a record of the episode back in the valley of Dry Creek, Oregon, a
tributary entering from the south.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


526
J HARLEN BRETZ
DRY CREEK, OREGON
This narrow valley descends a steep structural slope (the con-
tinuation of the Horse Heaven Hills uplift in Washington) to Walla
Walla plain, debouching about 3 miles northwest of Freewater. A
terrace composed of light-colored silt, about 50 feet high, extends
northwest and southeast along the front of the uplift at the mouth of
Dry Creek valley. Terrace forms continuing its profiles southward up
this valley are recognizable for 2 miles back. In every one of several
good exposures in this distance, pebbles of various kinds of foreign
rocks were found. All were essentially unaltered by weathering, one
was distinctly striated. The tiny pebbles and coarse grains of basalt
are abundant. They show some tendency toward a stratiform con-
centration in places. There are also silt layers and fine sand layers
which do not show these particles.!
The highest altitude at which this pebbly silt was found is 1,000
feet A.T. The next good cut up the valley is at 1,100 feet A.T. The
material here has none of the characteristics of the glacial silt. There
is no foreign material; and the contained basalt is weather-fractured
débris, mostly in large pieces and obviously derived from local
slopes.?
PINE CREEK
This drainage way, which is very similar to Dry Creek, de-
bouches from the uplifted tract into the plain about 3 miles farther
west. Its valley contains terraces of the silt in its lower 2 miles, the
highest being 975 feet A.T. The valley farther up is walled and
floored with basalt. One section is 20 feet high, with local stream
gravel at the base, and all the rest of massive silt in which are a few
" In the sample which was sifted, taken from an altitude of 9go feet A.T., 9 per cent
was stopped by the I mm. sieve and 50 per cent passed all screens. The largest frag-
ments were of foreign rock. Basalt particles, both fresh and weathered, are present.
The shapes of the particles are distinctly angular, though not of the extreme forms
described in other samples as chips, splinters, or slivers. Quartz is unusually abundant,
amounting to 40 per cent on the o.5 mm. sieve and 6o per cent on the o.25 mm. sieve.
This silt taken from the valley floor is simply a mixture of loess and local basalt.
There is very little quartz in grades coarser than o.125 mm. Another sample, taken at
1,150 feet, is of the hill-slope loess. The amount of material stopped on each of the
first six sieves ranges from o.3 to o.8 per cent. Quartz constitutes 25 per cent of that
on the o.25 mm. sieve but only to per cent of that on the o. 177 mm. sieve. Seventy-five
per cent of the total either passes all sieves or is stopped only by the finest.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 527
pockets and lenses of coarse sand and pebbles. There are plenty of
foreign fragments in these pockets, though the easily recognizable
"bright" basaltic débris was not found. Another section, near the
upper limit in this valley, has numerous foreign pebbles and imper-
fect stratification and pockets in which coarse basalt sand is very
prominent."
A fragment of the granodiorite porphyry was found on the divide
between Dry Creek and Pine Creek at 950 feet A.T. There are
numerous other boulders of foreign rock associated with it.
WAYLAND ROAD
A minor gulch utilized by this road up the structural slope, a
few miles west of Pine Creek valley, contains terraces of silt up to
925 feet A.T. The material of the terraces is typical in every way.
The highest exposure is about 180 feet above the silt terrace that
flanks the foot of the uplift. It is impossible to select a hillward
contact of this terrace, for the surface of the silt mantle rises gently
from the terrace flat up the lower slopes.
BUTLER GRADE
This abandoned road southward up the structural slope, nearly
south of the town of Touchet, affords no cuts. But the rain-washed
and wind-swept old roadway has much coarse black basalt sand
concentrated in the ruts. Most of it is unweathered or but slightly
weathered. Three to 5 per cent of this concentrate is composed of
tiny fragments of unweathered foreign rocks. This persists up to
about 1,000 feet A.T. Here the steep grade disappears across a
structural flat, and little wash has occurred. The next steep grade
begins a trifle below 1,300 feet. A few foreign pebbles were found
here up to 1,425 feet, as far as this traverse was carried. But the
finer material of the wash contains no foreign bits, and the basalt
sand and fine gravel is distinctly weathered. It seems probable that
1 In two samples of the silt, one taken at 950 and the other at 975 feet A.T., 12
per cent and 8.6 per cent were stopped by the 1 mm. sieve, while 43.5 per cent and 47.4
per cent passed all sieves. Both contain an increasing percentage of quartz down
through the first five sieves, reaching 65 per cent and 50 per cent, respectively, on the
0.25 mm. sieve. Both contain unweathered subangular pebbles of foreign rock and
angular particles of basalt, some of which is as hard as fresh rock when tested with a
knife blade.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


528
J HARLEN BRETZ
these pebbles were scattered along this road in the same way that
the bits of crockery, glass, and iron in the wash were carried here.
VAN SYCLE CANYON
Five or 6 miles farther west is a prominent spur of basalt proiect-
ing north from the lower slopes of the Horse Heaven Hills uplift.
Its summit, nearly a square mile in area, is 850 feet A.T. Walla
Walla River has cut a relatively narrow valley across its northern
slope, the bottom of which is 5oo feet below this summit. Van Sycle
Canyon, eroded along the steeply tilted, perhaps faulted, basalt
flows, enters the Walla Walla just west of the prominent spur. The
fine glacial silt is deep along the lower part of the stream way from
this canyon. It extends westward along the foot of the uplift almost
to the entrance of Wallula Gateway, the Columbia's spectacular
watergap through the Horse Heaven Hills uplift. On both sides of
Walla Walla River it constitutes the only material exposed between
the rock-walled Walla Walla trench and the Columbia.
THE WALLA WALLA PLAIN
The large downwarp in which Yakima, Snake, and Walla Walla
rivers enter the Columbia has minor structural diversities. One of
these is a smaller basin in the Walla Walla drainage area. It extends
eastward from the basaltic spur above-noted for 25 miles to the foot
of the uplift east of Walla Walla. It is about 15 miles across from
north to south. The basalt throughout this tract is below all stream
grades. In the city of Walla Walla, it is 500 feet below the surface.
The low tract has no loessial hills, yet it is much diversified by hills
and valleys and has a maximum local relief of 150 feet in less than
a mile. Almost all sections seen in this basin are in stratified silt,
sand, and gravel. A very few sections show reddish calcareous loess
at the base. The water-laid sediments of this plain show maximum
vertical sections of 8o-90 feet, and the total thickness probably
exceeds 150 feet.
The plain is crossed by a multitude of minor streams. These,
with Walla Walla River, have dissected the once continuous fill into
its present roughness. In the higher marginal parts of the plain the
material is like that in the lower parts of the tributary valleys al-
ready described. It is light-colored, sorted sand and silt with irregu-
lar and undulatory bedding, with seams and strata of dark, coarse
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 529
sand and fine gravel, with scattered erratic débris present in almost
every section, with pockets and lenses as well as disseminated tiny
pebbles and large grains of unweathered basalt.
The restored surface of the dissected fill descends westward about
25 feet to the mile. This might be considered an aggradational slope
if the material were fluviatile and had come from the headwaters of
the converging streams. But there is abundant evidence that it was
deposited in a body of glacial water reaching back from the Snake
and Columbia and submerging the region up to the 1,100-foot con-
tour, 6oo feet above the surface of the fill in its western part. The
slope therefore may be explained more satisfactorily as due to the
pre-silt floor, itself perhaps fluviatile. The Mill Creek fan and South
Fork fan may be portions of that floor, higher than the surface of
the glacial backwater.
Walla Walla River leaves this aggraded plain by the rock-walled
trench at Divide and Reese eroded in the northern slope of the
basaltic spur near Van Sycle Canyon. This crooked trench has con-
siderable remnants of the silt and sand deposit in it and therefore,
in large part at least, is the pre-silt dischargeway from the basin.
The trench is 300 feet deep at Reese.
If this be a correct picture of conditions before the submergence
by glacial water, let us attempt to visualize the details of the flood-
ing, assuming any normal cause and any reasonable volume for the
Snake and Columbia. The rise of that water first produced reverse
flow through the trench, the backwater emerging abruptly near
Divide into a basin ten times as wide as the rock-walled valley. This
condition would persist while the water in the western part of this
basin deepened to at least 300 feet, this figure determined by the
highest water-laid deposits in the valley here. Notable back-current
might have poured through the trench while the water rose, but it
could hardly have persisted across the expanding lake in the basin,
nor would there be any more favorable conditions for current back
across the flooded Walla Walla plain after the water had risen above
the barrier at Divide and Reese. Thick deposits of coarse gravel and
coarse sand, foreset up the Walla Walla valley, could hardly be
deposited out on the broad floor of this lake 5 miles from the eastern
end of the trench.
This sketch has been drawn that the reader may better appraise
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


530
J HARLEN BRETZ
the character of the water-laid sediments in the western and lower
part of the Walla Walla plain. These sediments will now be de-
scribed.
A river cliff near Cummings Bridge, half to three-fourths of a
mile south of the east end of the trench, shows about 6o feet of sand,
gravel, and silt. The section in mid-length of this cliff consists of a
few feet of brown sand beneath 20 feet of coarse rubble gravel con-
taining foreign fragments. The gravel and sand interpenetrate with
irregular lenses of each in the other. Above the poorly worn gravel
is 30 feet of fine brown sand to the top of the section. This sand is
distinctly and uniformly stratified into beds 2-4 feet thick.
Traced southward less than 1,000 feet, the upper brown sand
goes beneath another gravel bed, which in turn is covered with gray
sand and silt. This upper gravel member is black, prevailingly rather
fine textured and irregularly bedded. It contains several large boul-
ders. The gray sand and silt above it has undulatory and somewhat
irregular stratification.
But if traced northward from mid-length of the section, the
brown sand above the rubble gravel goes under gray silt and sand.
The black fine gravel of the south end of the section is absent. The
contact between the uniformly bedded brown sand below and the
irregularly bedded gray sand and silt above is unconformable, and
its descent northward finally cuts the brownish sand out of the sec-
tion, the gray silt and sand resting on the rubble gravel. Its un-
dulatory and irregular bedding conforms generally to the sloping
contacts and truncates the nearby horizontal bedding of the brown
sand.
Except perhaps for the two brown members, this section records
deposition in glacial water or derivation from such deposits. The
unconformity, which has a vertical range of about 30 feet in the
entire section, may record two different episodes of deposition
separated by a time of erosion. It may also be considered a product
of cut-and-fill during one depositional episode, if current of sufficient
depth and vigor can be shown from other evidences. By the first
explanation, the brownish color of the uniformly bedded sand might
be weather-staining during the erosional interval. By the second ex-
planation, the sand was brownish when deposited. Uniformity of the
color throughout 3 feet of sand, the faintness of the color, and the
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 531
complete absence of leaching or of infiltration of lime suggest strong-
ly that weathering in situ is not responsible for the color. But
whether or not two episodes of deposition are here recorded, one
may ask why coarse rubble gravel, containing foreign rock material,
should be at this place in Walla Walla valley. It does not show
anywhere in the trench to the west or in the wide plain to the east.
By what routes could it have come to position?
This gravel might be ascribed to the minor Warm Springs
Canyon mouthing here from the uplifted area to the south, though
Pine Creek, Dry Creek, and Van Sycle Canyon mouths do not have
such deposits and Warm Springs Canyon could not supply quartzite,
granite, schist, diorite, etc., unless older glacially derived deposits
were being eroded. The nearest source for quantities of little-worn
basaltic débris is the upper part of the basalt spur. This is essentially
scabland, though not channeled. The nearly bare rock of its broad
top is quite unlike any similar basalt spurs or eminences in the region
above I,I00 or 1,200 feet A.T. But it is difficult to get this material
off the top of the spur and on the upstream side by any normal rise
of backwater in Walla Walla valley.
Another section showing considerable gravel is afforded by a pit
about a mile south of the town of Touchet and § miles east of the
section at Cummings Bridge. It is essentially in the middle of the
Walla Walla valley here, 2 miles from the nearest elevations which
might contain basalt as high as the level of the deposit.
The basal part of the Touchet pit section is a coarse gravel, its
pebbles generally subangular, its stratification fairly regular, its
composition 99 per cent basalt, its material (native and foreign rock)
unstained, and its foresets dipping eastward, up the Walla Walla.
There are boulders of silt in this gravel, a foot in diameter and light
gray in color.
Above the coarse gravel is 12-15 feet of black fine gravel. Well-
sorted, well-stratified lenses of fine brown sand appear in the upper
part of this gravel and, above it, this sand constitutes a continuous
member of the section. Above the brown sand occurs a few feet of
fine gray sand containing abundant coarse basalt grains, poorly
arranged in irregular strata. They are not segregated cleanly from the
gray sand anywhere. Above this in turn is a few feet of gray silt with
the same sprinkling of coarse basalt sand grains. Foreign material
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


532
J HARLEN BRETZ
was found everywhere in the section except in the uppermost silt
and sand.
The total thickness of the section is go feet. The bluff summit
here is 150 feet above the river, and the 6o feet of material higher
than the section top apparently contains nothing but silt and fine
sand. The water-laid deposit in this part of Walla Walla valley
seems resolvable into a sequence recording, first, transportation of
material eastward up the slope of the plain and, later, a gradual
diminution of transporting ability. Glacial water is clearly recorded.
The third section to be examined in this part of the wide valley
lies about halfway between the two already described. It is the
northwestern margin of the irrigated Gardena tracts, which here
break off in 8o-foot cliffs descending northward almost vertically to
the river.
The sections in these cliffs agree in a very general way with that
in the Touchet pit. There is fine black gravel, fine brown sand, and
gray silt, all well stratified in the large. The silt is limited to the
upper third of the sections. But the brown sand and the black gravel
are interbedded, the larger part of the gravel being in the middle,
not at the bottom, of the sections. The thicker strata of any kind
of sediment are lower down than the thinner strata. There are a
few cobbles and large pebbles in the black gravel. Current bedding
in this gravel is prominent, the shallow foresets dipping eastward
against the slope of the Walla Walla plain. In at least three places,
all of them at the base of black gravel members, there is clear
evidence of erosion of the upper surface of the underlying fine brown
sand, obviously produced by the up-valley current which brought
in the black gravel.
The silt which characterizes the upper third of the Gardena cliffs
is definitely arranged in strata of very fine gray sand grading up into
gray silt. The silt is commonly dense and hard, bending the edge
of the tobacco tin into which a sample was scraped. These strata
are progressively thinner toward the cliff summits. In one place near
the top, there are sixteen strata in 6 feet, the thickest being 12
inches, the thinnest about 12 inches. All are somewhat irregular in
thickness, and the fine sand at the base of each has current laminae.
A sharp break everywhere separates the layers. In a few places this
silt and fine sand contains coarse black sand either as scattered
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 533
grains or in small lenses. Here and there are pebbles and cobbles of
erratic material.
A feature not seen elsewhere in the silt deposits discussed in this
paper is a pocket or lens aggregation of small pebbles of gray silt in
the varvelike arrangement of silt and fine sand. Apparently a fairly
coherent silt already deposited was broken up, transported, and re-
deposited to produce this structure.
The top of none of these water-laid deposits is much above 550
feet A.T., though on the margins of Walla Walla valley and back in
tributary valleys, the upper limits of the glacial silt are 1,100 feet
A.T. The basalt walls of the trench at Divide and Reese rise on both
sides to a minimum height of about 650 feet, and silt in this trench
shows that it was also filled while the silt plain of Walla Walla valley
was being deposited.
But the silt in the trench shows no varvelike structures. Through
a vertical range of a hundred feet at Reese, it is much more like the
silt on the higher margins of Walla Walla valley. There is stratifica-
tion, though it is irregular and undulatory. There is sorting, though
much of the material is not sorted. There is much interbedding of
gray sand with gray silt. Pockety aggregates or concentrates of
coarse unweathered basaltic sand are present; so are thin fairly con-
tinuous strata. But there are no marked gravel members, and there
is no clean-washed fine brown sand.
Though stratified gray silt and sand cover the floor of the Walla
Walla plain almost as far east as Walla Walla, the Gardena type
of varve like bedding in the uppermost part of the section has not
been found east of Lowden, 8 or 9 miles from the head of the trench
at Divide. It is limited to the western and lower part of the basin.
It does not occur higher than the summit of the trench walls at
Reese. It is sufficiently different from all other phases of the glacial
silt to need a different explanation. Two different views may be
entertained.
One is that two different deposits are shown in these sections,
the silt with varvelike bedding being the younger. There is uncon-
formity in the Gardena sections, but it occurs at different places
between sand and gravel in the lower part of the sections and is not
at the base of the varvelike bedding. Nor is there any break between
the upper varve-bedded silt and the lower and thicker members of
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


534
J HARLEN BRETZ
silt and sand. Instead, there is good gradation and the currents
recorded in the lower members appear gradually to have decreased
until nothing more than lake-bottom circulation existed when the
uppermost silt was laid down. In the Cummings Bridge section,
close to the head of the trench, there is a more marked unconformity,
which may require a definite episode of exposure and erosion for its
explanation. But this necessity is not yet clear; and even if required,
it is the lone example of its class in the Walla Walla valley, so far
as now known.
The other explanation for the well-bedded sand and silt strata
in Gardena Cliffs considers that the whole Walla Walla silt deposit
was made in one episode of submergence, and that the differences
in character are due both to different location and to changes of
conditions in one location. This explanation considers that the depo-
sition of silt was synchronous with scabland-making and that scab-
land waters were of enormous volume for a relatively short time,
though initial and closing stages may have been no greater than
ordinary melting would produce.
This explanation is built on the strong evidence for pronounced
currents of glacial water flowing back from the Columbia and up the
slope of the Walla Walla plain. It requires the rock barrier at
Divide and Reese. The postulated succession of conditions is as
follows:
I. A preglacial, broad, low Walla Walla valley, structurally de-
termined and drained by a narrow valley or trench eroded into basalt
at Divide and Reese.
2. A rapid rise of glacial water in the Columbia and Snake val-
leys which poured back through the trench and finally over the
basalt spur above the top of the trench walls. The up-valley currents
could be produced in no other way for, as in all other valleys con-
sidered in this paper, the water simply backed up; it never flowed
through and out by some other route. The scabland up to 850 on
this spur was produced by such up-valley current.
3. Deposition of the rubble gravel near Divide and of the better-
stratified, finer, and more-worn gravel in Gardena and Touchet sec-
tions. These locations are close to the basalt barrier.
4. Great turbidity and turbulence of this water, recorded by the
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 535
pebbly silts with berg-borne débris, persisting back to the margins
of the Walla Walla valley and up in many tributaries.
5. Attainment of maximum flooding, cessation of the great
turbulence, and maximum deposition of silt and sand. This silt to
cover the gravel which was deposited during the time of vigorous
backflow. The trench at Divide and Reese to be silted full at this
time, but the deeper western part of the Walla Walla valley not to
be silted up level with the top of the trench walls.
6. Subsidence of the glacial waters, leaving a local shallow lake
east of the silt-covered rock sill and the silt-filled trench through it.
The lowest place for discharge of this lake to depend on surface of
the silt deposit over the barrier and not to coincide wholly with the
course of the preglacial trench. A rock sill therefore holds up the
level of the shallow lake.
7. The lower part of the silt-choked trench to be cleaned out
fairly rapidly and a tributary to be developed which will erode the
silt filling in the upper part of the trench where the outlet fails to
follow the old trench.
8. Relatively rapid erosion by this tributary eventually to pro-
vide a place lower than the sill, for the Walla Walla lake to discharge.
9. Shifting of the outlet, establishment of drainage entirely along
the pre-glacial route, draining of the lake and erosion of the lake
beds and the underlying glacial silt, sand, and gravel to the present
topography.
This sequence explains the varve-like structures in the lower part
of the Walla Walla valley only by assuming that the rainfall which
would wash silt and fine sand from the higher levels down into this
lingering pool had distinct seasonal or other variations, making the
lake very muddy at times and allowing it to become clear in succeed-
ing intervals.
The rock barrier is essential. No other place in the entire region
is known where varve structures exist in the silt, nor where such a
combination of basin and barrier exists. One difficulty with the ex-
planation is the presence of a few pebbles and cobbles of erratic
material in the varve-bedded silt. Perhaps shore ice retransported
them, but berg-ice appears more logical and is forbidden at this
stage. Another difficulty is that the abandoned outlet channel across
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


536
] HARLEN BRETZ
the sill has not yet been found. One unusual feature which supports
the explanation is the presence of tiny pebbles of silt in the sandy
part of some varves. This may record erosion of glacial silt on slopes
above the lake level but below 1,100 feet.
The Walla Walla basin sediments differ from those in Snake
valley and elsewhere in another item than the varve bedding. There
are no gravel bars constricting valley mouths. By the writer's ex-
planation of scabland and silt, these valley-mouth bars should be
formed only where a great current in a main valley passed the mouth
of a minor valley. Eddying of deep vigorous currents back into these
minor valleys seems the only adequate mechanism for their locations,
structure, and topography. Since the Snake Valley east of the scab-
lands contains many striking bars of this sort, a great current along
the Snake is necessary; and such deposits in this part of the Snake
show foresets, prevailingly up the valley, away from the scabland.
But since Walla Walla valley had only a narrow trench to carry
back the first of the rising flood and a very wide valley for its higher
stages to fill, and since it had no great length to fill with water, there
was no opportunity for development of currents of this vigor.
Still another difference between the Walla Walla valley and the
Snake valley deposits is to be found in shapes of pebbles. Although
pebbles in the silt are common, very few broken-rounds have been
found. Since they are common to silt deposits in almost all other
valleys examined, some special conditions seem indicated. One item
may be the absence of a supply of rounded gravel on the Walla
Walla plain when the glacial waters invaded it. Another item may
be the absence of large boulders of country basalt to serve as ham-
mers. Another item apparently is the failure of the Walla Walla
back-flow to develop adequate currents. The most favorable place
in Walla Walla valley for broken-rounds to be made is near the
trenched barrier at Divide and Reese, but this feature of pebble
shapes had not been discovered when the gravel near this barrier
was examined.
SNAKE RIVER VALLEY BETWEEN PAGE AND PERRY
Scabland erosional and depositional forms along this part of the
Snake have been briefly described in earlier papers. The upper limit
near Perry, at the mouth of Palouse River, is 1,325 feet A.T. This is
also the altitude of the bases of loessial scarps here. Thence down the
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 537
Snake for 35 miles this upper limit descends to about 1,080 or 1,050
feet, at which altitude glacial waters could overflow the lower bluffs
and enter Walla Walla valley.
Backwater tracts are amply recorded by the silts both in Snake
River valley above Perry and in Walla Walla valley, and the upper
limits in each agree remarkably well with the upper limit in the
Snake at each mouthing into scabland. It is of great interest there-
fore to find that this portion of the Snake between the two great
pondings contains no silt deposits. There are no silt terraces, or
remnants of silt terraces; and no traces of any kind of this material
except in the mouths of some tributary canyons that are not detailed
here.
It is a remarkable thing that Walla Walla valley should have
an almost complete mantle of silt 80-100 feet in maximum exposed
thickness and ranging through 650 feet of altitude, a deposit con-
spicuous in almost every cut 5 feet or more in depth and expressed
in the topography almost everywhere, while the adjacent Snake
River valley, even deeper than Walla Walla valley, should have
no trace of the deposit on slopes, in washes, in terraces, in mantling
of the bar gravel or masking of the scabland. It is equally remark-
able that the valley of the Snake does contain just such deposits
above the mouth of the Palouse.
For this striking contrast, the following explanations may be
proposed:
I. The silt deposit is older than the scabland. The glacial flood
has subsequently swept away all that was deposited in Snake valley
between Perry and Page.
2. The silt deposit is older than the scabland; and the erosion
produced by a series of episodes of glacial discharge down the silt-
free portion of Snake valley, plus interglacial stream erosion, has
removed the silt.
3. The silt deposit is the correlative of the scabland and its
gravel bars. The scabland is the product of enormous rivers operat-
ing during a very short time, geologically.
4. The silt is contemporaneous with scabland, but both are the
cumulative result of several glacial episodes.
5. The silt is younger than the scabland but has been removed by
subsequent erosion on the slopes and bottom of Snake River valley.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


538
J HARLEN BRETZ
If the silt is older than scabland and if the scabland is a record
of enormous glacial torrents, then there is no record of that flood
water back in Walla Walla valley or in Snake River valley above
Perry. There is also no mechanism provided for the extraordinary
features of this silt and its associated gravel. The coincidence of
upper limit of scabland and silt in both pondings must be dismissed
as coincidence only. The difference in level in the two pondings is
left unexplained. The only merit of this explanation is that it is a
possible escape from the flood hypothesis.
If the silt is older than scabland and if the scabland is the product
of several Pleistocene episodes during which (and during the inter-
glacial intervals separating them) the canyons were deepened a few
hundred feet, the continuity of the silt mantle must be a matter of
successive overlaps from the later pondings in the deepened valleys.
This erosion is impossible in the down-warped Walla Walla basin;
hence the higher level of the silts there would be impossible by the
proposed explanation. The unweathered condition of the highest silts
in each of the two large pondings would be very difficult to explain.
The persistence of an extensive mantle on steep slopes at the upper
limits would be impossible, for deepening in the wide-open valleys
means at least as much widening, probably much more. If there were
narrow inner gorges of the required depths in these more flaring
valleys, this objection to the explanation would be removed. But no
such gorges exist.
If the silt is correlative with the scabland and if the writer's
interpretation of scabland, scarps, and gravel deposits is correct,
there are no disharmonies in the scheme. Obiections to this explana-
tion will be made on a priori grounds, not on the field evidence.
If silt and scabland are correlative but both are the consequence
of several Pleistocene epochs, several objections already presented
must be met. The highest of the silt deposit should be exceedingly
fragmentary instead of a continuous mantle, its basalt grains and
foreign pebbles should be distinctly decayed, the different soil hori-
zons should be present in the higher silt where on flats or gentle slopes.
These features are not present. Most cuts in the reddish or buff-
colored loess of the plateau show good A and B horizons, but no cuts
in the silt anywhere in the region have shown them. The remarkable
gravel deposits of Snake valley and their remarkable setting and
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 539
structure are ignored by this hypothesis. So are the less striking but
significant gravel beds in the western part of the Walla Walla plain.
If the silt is younger than scabland, its absence in Snake River
valley between Page and Perry must be due to still later erosion.
Yet the Snake just above the scablands has the mantle, and there
are hundreds of re-entrants between Page and Perry where material
of such geologic recency should still be conspicuous. There are flat-
tish uplands above the brink, yet no silt on them. There are broad,
deep, and partially inclosed depressions back of the great gravel
bars, in which almost no erosion has occurred since the bars were
built; yet no silt occupies them.
The writer believes that a fair evaluation of these different
hypotheses for the absence of silt deposits in Snake valley between
Page and Perry will rule out all but the two which consider the silt
as contemporaneous with scabland. A fair consideration of the
unique field evidences will carry conviction that scabland-making,
silt-deposition, and valley-cutting on the plateau did not extend
through several Pleistocene episodes. Many of the original features
of scabland and silt are impossible by that view, and their equal
freshness at all levels through a noteworthy vertical range debars
that view.
CONCLUDING STATEMENT
The greatest known thickness of the poorly stratified and pebble-
charged silt and sand is at Johnson's Bridge on Touchet River. The
section extends from 550 to 650 feet A.T. The upper limit of the
water body was 450 feet above the top of the section. If all this silt
was carried in during one short episode of exceedingly turbulent
water, loo feet of silt was suspended in 550 feet of water. Would the
increased specific gravity of such muddy water be a factor in the
transportational problem afforded by the widely scattered tiny bits
of fresh basalt? These particles must come in from the scablands;
they cannot be produced in Walla Walla valley (though they may
have been so produced in Snake valley).
It may well be asked, also, if this method of silt transportation
is supported by all the field evidence. Is the partial sorting and
stratification possible by this hypothesis? Is not some kind of rhyth-
mic pulsation in water supply and sediment supply recorded in the
common irregular and undulatory strata? One might well be in-
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


540
J HARLEN BRETZ
clined to think the stratification impossible by the flood hypothesis,
and perhaps the writer's conception should be modified to allow for
minor rises during a subsidence from the maximum.
If this be correct, the stratification should be in the upper part
of the deposit. Most sections are too shallow to show full thickness;
but so far as now known, the stratified phases do not underlie any
notable beds of unstratified silt. However, they do not occur close
to the upper limits of the deposit. This upper-limit silt seems every-
where to show the minimum of stratification.
Another explanation for the stratification might be modeled on
the preferred interpretation for the varve-like silts in Walla Walla
valley. Later re-working on the valley floors is possible during
subsidence of the flood and perhaps for some time after that. Vari-
ous gravel bars would have been effective dams for a time. Perhaps
irregularities in the surface of the silt deposit itself would have
provided short-lived basins in which re-working of wash from adja-
cent steeper slopes could occur.
The flood hypothesis encounters another obiection in the silt
lenses occurring in gravel deposits. Such lenses demand cessation of
current while they are formed. How rapidly does the finest of this
silt subside? Experimentation with silt which passes the 0.074 mm.
sieve shows that in a mixture of one part silt to four parts water,
half of the silt settled out in 2 minutes after stirring was stopped,
three-quarters in 5 minutes, seven-eighths in 9 minutes, and all but
about one-fiftieth in 15 minutes. The need for constant turbulence
to maintain even the finest of this material in suspension is thus
evident. A very brief cessation of current essentially clears the whole
water body.
If one discounts or denies the evidences of torrential up-valley
currents and considers this record of glacial backwater in more than
forty separate valleys as the product of a general ponding, he must
then explain the progressively higher altitudes northward from
Walla Walla River to Kamiache Creek as the result of subsequent
warping. The amount of such required warping is slight for this
region, only So feet in 1o0 miles. He must then explain the hori-
zontality of upper limits at widely separated places in the Walla
Walla valley system and in Snake valley and its tributaries as due
to a lack of differential movement in each of those portions of the
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS EAST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 54I
warped surface, though he must have 200 feet of warping in a narrow
zone between them. He must next admit that, at the time of pond-
ing, there could be essentially no gradient for the recorded upper
surface of the vigorous scabland rivers from Kamiache Creek to
Walla Walla River, and he must deny therefore that these river-
scoured surfaces were formed as early as the ponding records. The
agreement of upper limits of scabland and upper limits of ponds can
then be coincidence only.
If he is willing to grant preglacial valleys essentially as now, and
scabland contemporaneous with the ponding, but desires to use this
conception of warping, the combined Palouse and Snake (where used
by glacial streams) had a preglacial descent of about 60o feet in 100
miles, as contrasted with the present descent of 1,400 feet in that
distance. On this gradient of 6 feet to the mile the glacial streams
must have eroded the scabland.
If, however, while retaining the idea of warping, he prefers to
think that the highest scabland and pond records and all of the
loessial scarps antedate the canyon-making in the plateau, he must
reduce this preglacial gradient of the plateau to something like 3
feet to the mile. In other words, the admittedly recent deformation
must be interglacial. And on this gradient (for large volume is de-
barred by this conception) he must develop the velocities necessary
for the erosion of the high scabland and the scarps. The difficulties
by any of these combinations are great. And field evidence reviewed
in this paper is utterly at variance with them.
The final accepted explanation for channeled scabland must be
built on, limited by, and constructed to include, all the field evidence.
That such evidence is of extraordinary character is obvious to any
geologist. That it is unique should be clear to glacialists and physi-
ographers. The writer is convinced that anyone who attempts to
evaluate the evidence must discard the idea that glacial waters here
behaved as elsewhere, the only difference being in magnitude of
results. He holds that it was a difference in kind of results. The data
in this paper constitute a category of facts not known when the flood
hypothesis was first proposed. The relations to that hypothesis are
to be decided by the reader. The writer asks only that, if his inter-
pretation be rejected, the data herewith presented be organized to
make some coherent interpretation.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sun, 18 Jun 2023 23:48:46 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
