BULLETIN OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA
VOL. 34, PP. 573-608
SEPTEmBEr 30, 1923
GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 1
BY J. HARLEN BRETZ
(Presented before the Society December 30, 1923)
CONTENTS
Introduction...
Topography and drainage
Stratigraphy.
Physiography
Glaciation.
The Spokane glaciation.
General statement.....
Spokane River and Palouse River drainage
Vicinity of Spokane
Vicinity of Spangle
Vicinity of Cheney
Vicinity of Lamont
Vicinity of Kahlotus
Vicinity of Sprague
Crab Creek drainage.
General statement
Grand Coulee...
Hartline structural valley
Quincy Valley or Basin
Moses Coulee..
The Wisconsin glaciation
Discussion..
Page
... 573
. 575
. 576
. 577
580
.. 580
580
.581
581
583
585
586
587
. 587
588
588
591
593
594
RM
602
608
INTRODUCTION
Only the northern part of the Columbia Plateau is concerned in this
study and only waters from the Cordilleran ice-sheet. Two glacial
epochs are involved- one the Wisconsin, the other as vet undated. Be-
sides contributing to the geological history of the region, this article
endeavors to show that glacier-born streams, under proper conditions,
are erosive agents of great vigor over large tracts far from the front of
the melting ice.
1 Manuscript received by the Secretary of the Society January 10, 1923
(573)


SADOLE MOUNTAINS
GLACIAL
DRAINAGE
FEATURES
O F
EAST- CENTRAL WASHINGTON
SPOKANE DRAINAGE
WISCONSIN DRAINAGE
EXISTING LAKES IN BLACK
RINGOLD
574 J. I. BRETZ GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PLATEAU
FIGURE 1.-Glacial drainage Features of cast-central Washington


TOPOGRAPHIC FEATURES
575
TopograPHY AND DraINaGE
The Columbia basalt plateau is separated from several mountain
ranges on the north and from the Cascade Range on the west by the
trench in which flows Columbia River. On the east, the plateau abuts
against and interfingers with the Cœur d'Alene Mountains of Idaho.
When the Miocene basalt flows of this region ceased, the lava plain
abutted in a similar fashion against the mountains on the north and
west. The cutting of the Columbia Valley between mountains and plain
in the great are known as the "Big Bend" has partially isolated this
portion of the former lava plain and thus given it the character of a
plateau. The Columbia Valley north of the plateau is a great canyon,
1,500 to 2,000 feet deep, its bottom less than 1,000 feet above the sea.
It does not, however, serve for the complete northern boundary of the
plateau. Spokane River, its tributary from the Cœur d'Alene Mountains
on the east, may be considered as marking the northern limit of the
pleateau east of the Columbia in Washington. The canyon of Snake
River in Washington marks the southern margin of that portion of the
plateau with which this study is concerned.
Widespread, gentle warping of the Columbia basalt flows in Washing-
ton has made a great shallow, structural basin, the rim of which is
roughly the margin of the plateau on the west, north, and east. The
flows, originally horizontal, are 2,500 feet above tide about the eastern
and northern margins and 4,000 to 6,000 feet above tide in the Cascade
Range, along the western margin. The lowest tract in the basin is the
general vicinity of the junction of Columbia and Snake rivers. Here
the basalt flows dip below the Columbia, perhaps below sealevel. Drain-
age escapes to the Pacific through the Columbia Gorge, cut in the Cascade
Range, the greatest water gap on the North American continent.
The expression "the plateaw" will be understood in this paper to denote
that portion of the Columbia Plateau bounded by Spokane, Columbia,
and Snake rivers and the mountains of Idaho.
There are many lesser basins of structural origin in the great feature
above outlined and many sharp flexures, particularly in the western part,
near the youthful Cascade Range. Most of the drainage lines of the
plateau are consequent on its warped surface. The Columbia is the great
exception. It approaches the rim from the north, but, instead of cross-
ing and entering the basin, it swings westward and then southward in
the Big Bend already described, before entering the basin. As a conse-
quence of this, no waterway of importance enters the Columbia from the
concave side of the Big Bend. Drainage of the plateau is centripetal,


576 J. H. BRETZ- -GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PLATEAU
and the master stream finally enters the basin after it has skirted the
northern and western sides in part. Onlv after it enters does it receive
the drainage of the plateau.
The northern rim of the plateau is the highest part. It is a broad
divide extending from Spokame west to the southward bend of Columbia
River at the foot of the Cascade Range, parallel to Spokane and Colum-
bia rivers and on the average only 10 miles south of them. Down its
southern slope flow numerous tributaries to Palouse River and Crab
Creek.
These two stream systems and Moses Coulee, farther west, are
intimately concerned in the glacial drainage history to be outlined.
Palouse River is the largest stream on the plateau north of Snake
River. Its drainage area lies in the southeastern quarter of the plateau.
Its system consists of a large number of minor centripetal streams which
flow westward toward the central part of the basin. It enters Snake
River in the middle of the plateau's southern margin. Crab Creek
gathers the small centripetal streams from the north-central part and
carries their discharge westward toward the Columbia, which it enters
not far south of the middle of the western margin of the plateau.
Crab Creek has the largest drainage area of any stream on the basalt
plateau of Washington, but there is so little rainfall and so much evap-
oration in this area that no water today flows to the Columbia. It has
been otherwise in the past. The area possesses a complete system of
streamways. Some of them are normal valleys in maturity, only the
rainfall in some more humid times of the past having formed the
streams. Others are canyons of noteworthy, even spectacular, depths,
intimately related to the history of the glacial drainage of the plateau.
STRATIGRAPHY
The dominant formation of the plateau is the Columbia lava. It has
been completely covered by sedimentary deposits of silt, ash, and loess.
These have suffered much from glacial and fluvial erosion, but still per-
sist and give character to the topography and soils of more than half of
the plateau. In the western part of the plateau this sediment is presumably
the Ellensburg formation. It is intimately related to the basalt, its
deposition beginning in some places before the great basalt flows had
ceased, and in other places later and minor basalt flows occurring after
its accumulation had well begun. If the sedimentary formation, or its
lower part, is Ellensburg, its presence indicates clearly that the plateau
is determined by the original surface of the Miocene lavas, not by any
later erosional plans developed on the basalt.


PHYSIOGRAPHIC FEATURES
577
PHYSIOgRAPHY
The surface of the plateau bears two strikingly different physiographic
aspects. Locally, one is known as "Palouse Hills" and the other as
"Scabland." Not alone are these sharply contrasted areas in close justa-
position, but they are interfingered and interlocked. Every one of the
seven counties of the plateau possesses areas of both types.
The "Palouse Hills" topography is best shown in Whitman County
south of Spokane and in the eastern half of the Palouse River system.
'The region is essentially all in slopes, a network of drainage lines covers
it, the soils are fine and deep, and ledges of basalt are exposed only on
stept
DIGURE 2. Steptoe Butte and the maturely dissected Palouse Region east of the
"Scablands?
lower slopes and rarely on these. Profiles are convex only on hilltops;
all valley slopes are strikingly concave. The "Palouse Hills" topography
is typically mature. It is developed in the super-basalt sedimentary in
large part. Its relief averages about 250 feet. The main streams now
are in canyons in basalt below the floors of the mature valleys. This
type of topography (figure 2), with the same soils and underlying forma-
tion, is widely distributed elsewhere on the plateau, but the drainage
pattern is not so intricately detailed farther west, where rainfall since
the uplift of the Cascade Range has been less.
The "Scablands" are lowlands among the groups of "Palouse Hills,"
plane in a general way, but diversified by a multiplicity of irregular and
XXXVIII-BULL. GEOL. Soc. AM., VoL. 34, 1922


578 J. H. BRETZ GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PLATEAU
commonly anastomosing channels and rock-basins eroded in basalt, and
containing meadows, swamps, and lakes (figures 3 and 4). The local
name refers to the absence of soil over much of these tracts, the basalt
outcropping in ledges and over considerable level areas.
The "Scab-
FIGURE 3. Channeled "Scabland" of Spokane Age
This area is on the plateau near the head of Grand Coulee.
FIGURE 4,- Spokane Drainage Channels in Mid-length of Moses Coulee
'The narrow inner channel is of Wisconsin age.
lands" are commonly elongated tracts, with their channels and rock
basins elongated in parallelism.
Some of these channels are canons
several hundred feet deep. Almost all of the lakes of the plateau lie in
the Scablands (figure 5). None occur in the Palouse Hills.


ROCK LAKE
579
FIGURE S.Rock Lake, in a glacial Drainage Channel of Spokane Age


580 J. H. BRETZ-GLICIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PLATEAU
GLACIATION
Probably the entire highland area north of the plateau was buried be-
neath the Cordilleran ice-sheet during the Pleistocene glaciations. At
least three times the Cordilleran ice forced a crossing of the Columbia
Valley and advanced onto the plateau. The latest of these, of Wisconsin
age, has been described; the earlier ones thus far have been but noted in
the literature. Farther east, where Spokane River serves as the bound-
ary, only two glacial invasions of the plateau are known, both of which
are pre-Wisconsin, and only brief notes exist regarding them.? The
latter of these two glaciations is well recorded in the topography. With
it and the Wisconsin glaciation on the northwestern part of the plateau
this paper chiefly deals.
THe Spokane GLacIation
GENERAL STATEMENT
Observers for vears have been noting the existence of granite boulders
scattered over the basalt plateau of Washington far beyond the limits
reached by the Wisconsin ice. They are now known to belong to four
categories: (1) derived from knobs of granite buried in or projecting
above the basalt flows, (2) berg-drifted in a widespread ponding during
late Wisconsin time,' (3) glacier-borne during glaciations earlier and
more extensive than the Wisconsin, and (4) berg-carried in great streams
born of one of these earlier ice-sheets.
The precise limits reached by the earlier ice-sheets are as yet un-
mapped, but enough is known to indicate that the latter of the two
crossed the Columbia and Spokane valleys from the northern highlands,
pushed well up on the rim of the plateau, and in the vicinity of Spokane
advanced south of the rim divide as far as Spangle and nearly to Cheney.
No prominent morainal margin now exists, if one ever was formed, but
the till, the striated erratic boulders, the deposits of outwash material,
and the drainage channels constitute adequate evidence of the glaciation.
It is here named the Spokane glaciation. Details which are essential to
a conception of the character of the Spokane glaciation, so far as it is
now known, are here presented.
? Frank Leverett: Bull. Geol. Soc. Am., vol. 28, 1917, p. 143.
M. M. Leighton: Bull. 22, Wash. Geol. Survey, 1919.
Thomas Large: Science, vol. 56, 1922, p. 335.
J. T. Pardee: Science, vol. 56, 1922, p. 686.
3 J. H. Bretz: The late Pleistocene submergence in the Columbia Valley of Oregon
and Washington.
Jour. Geol., vol. 27, 1919, pp. 489-506.


THE SPOKANE GLACIATION
581
SPOKANE RIVER AND PALOUSR RIVER DRAINAGE
Vicinity of Spokane.--The city of Spokane is built in a valley eroded
in the basalt, not more than 10 or 15 miles from the margin of the pla-
teau. To the east rise the mountains of Idaho--an older, higher land
surface whose embayed and spurred flanks make an irregular contact
between mountains and plateau. Moran Peak, about 8 miles southeast
of Spokane, is one of many isolated peaks of the older mountains, stand-
ing out in the plateau. Remnants of the plateau extend perhaps 20
miles north of Spokane, separated by the valleys of the Spokane and its
tributaries and terminated on the east and north by higher hills of crys-
talline rock. These remnants constitute mesas, such as Pleasant Prairie
and Five-Mile Prairie, about 2,400 feet above tide and about 400 feet
above the surface of the Wisconsin valley trains in the intervening val-
levs. The summits of these flat-topped hills apparently mark essentially
the original surface of the Columbia lava flows. West and south of
Spokane the Columbia plateau extends for many miles, interrupted only
here and there, near the margins, by island-like hills or mountains of
older rock +
Boulders of various crystalline rocks, igneous and metamorphic, with
characteristic glacially planed, beveled, and striated surfaces, lie scat-
tered on the surface of the Columbia plateau about Spokane, extending
as far south as the base of Moran Peak and the village of Spangle, close
to the base of the Palouse Hills. They have not been found, however,
in this maturely dissected country, nor at altitudes much above 2,500
feet above tide on the northern slopes of Moran Peak and Mica Peak,
east to the Idaho line.
Outwash gravel deposits at similar elevations and close to the driftless
Palouse Hills are known at Pantops, along the Inland Empire Highway,
and elsewhere. The deposit at Pantops is at least 30 feet deep and pos-
sesses current bedding with southward dip. It lies on the basalt plateau
not more than a mile west of the base of Moran Peak, at an altitude close
to 2,100 feet above tide. The gravel in the deposit is not stained or
cemented; it looks as fresh as Wisconsin gravel in the Great Lakes re-
gion. Scattered through it are hundreds of granite boulders averaging
3 feet in diameter, many of them exceeding 10 feet. The gravel is not
coarse, there are no cobble phases in it, and the boulders are wholly out
of accord with the gravel as a stream deposit. Furthermore, the boulders
are subangular and show considerable decomposition of the granite on
their less-rubbed surfaces. They doubtless are a local contribution, de-
+ Named "steptoes" by Russell.


582
J. H. BRETZ-GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PLATEAU
inaton
Pierre 6.-Glacial


THE SPOKANE GLACIATION
583
rived by glacial plucking of the decayed granite on the northern flanks
of Moran Peak and Mica Peak. They are boulders of decomposition and
doubtless were easilv quarried by the ice. Their abundance in the gravel
and the little rubbed condition are clear indications that the front of the
ice-sheet did not advance far beyond this place.
Despite the fresh appearance of the gravel at Pantops, the topography
gives no clue to its presence. From what can be seen now, it is difficult
to determine whether the Pantops gravel is a kamey deposit or is a rem-
nant of a valley train or outwash plain. It blends into the lower slopes
of Moran Peak and the basalt plateau.
There are other gravel deposits on the plateau immediately south of
Spokane, similar to that at Pantops in altitude, bedding, freshness of
material, and absence of fluvio-glacial forms, but none possess the
granitic boulders of decomposition.
Vicinity of Spangle. The village of Spangle is 12 miles almost di-
rectly south of Pantops and 15 miles south of the eastern part of Spo-
kane. Maturely dissected driftless country lies to the east and south, a
scabland plain to the west (figure 6). Striated erraties have been found
here as high as 2,500 feet above tide, on the slopes which face the scab-
land, and within 100 feet of the hill tops.
The drainage of this part of the Palouse country is northwestward,
toward the scabland tract. When glacial ice stood at the limit marked
approximately by the north-south line between Pantops and Spangle,
this drainage was blocked and a lake was formed for which another dis-
chargeway was necessary. The waters of Latah (Hangman) Creek and
its tributaries, Rock Creek, California Creek, Mica Creek, etcetera, aug-
mented by a great volume of water from the ice, spilled over the divide
west of Latah Creek, about 6 miles southeast of Spangle, and entered
North Pine Creek, a minor tributary of Pine Creek, flowing thence
southwestward 20 miles across the unglaciated Palouse hill land to enter
the scabland region at the north end of Rock Lake. The prominent spill-
ways were eroded across the divide into North Pine Creek Valley. The
floor of each of the cols is on basalt at about 2,450 feet above tide and is
essentially a scabland tract. The glacial waters back of this double spill-
way doubtless were ponded in Latah and Rock Creek valleys.
During the occupation of the spillways these waters eroded deeply in
the basalt. The larger spillway is half a mile wide at the col. Both are
well shown on the Oakesdale topographic map and on the Spokane
County soil map. Near the junction of North Pine Creek and Pine
§ Thomas Large: The glaciation of the Cordilleran region. Science, vol. 56, no. 1447,
1922, p. 335.


584 J. H. BRETZ-GLACINE DRAINAGE, ON COLUMBId PLATEAU
Creek and in the larger valley are great bars and terraces of coarse
basaltic gravel, poorly sorted and much of it subangular. Mingled with
it are a few cobbles and small boulders of granite and quartzite. The
material farther down Pine Creek Valley is finer and better sorted. It
seems clear that most of the debris was derived by erosion of the spill-
ways themselves, only a small amount of foreign material crossing the
lake on ice-rafts from the front of the ice-sheet.
The valley during this episode in its history was but a channel. The
glacial stream filled it from side to side for a depth of tens of feet. This
is shown a few miles above Malden, where the stream flooded over a low
shoulder of basalt, cutting a channel in the rock at least 40 foet deep;
though the main valley alongside was wide open and received gravel
deposits. North Pine Creek now flows through this channel. The main
current of the stream here eut across a curve in the preexisting valley.
The gradient of this glacial stream was close to 30 feet to the mile in its
upper part and about 20 feet to the mile in the lower part.
The character of the terraces in Pine Creek Valley below the junction
of North Pine Creek is instructive. Like the Pantops deposit, there are
no well defined depositional forms. The terrace tops do not abut sharply
against the hillslopes, but instead waste has crept out on the gravel de-
posits from the slopes above, and the valleyward edges of the terraces
have become rounded and notched by widened gullies until the terraco
form is obseure. This is well shown at Kenora, where the Chicago, Mil-
waukee and Saint Paul Railroad has opened a large pit. in the gravel.
Furthermore, these terraces are only fragments here and there of what
was once a continuous filling. Despite these evidences of considerable
age, the material in the deposits appears fresh. It is unstained and
uncemented.
Only one other glacial drainage route across the mature Palouse cou-
try is known, and this was but a tributary to the Pine Creek channel.
Waters from glacial ice spilled southward through a low place at Mica
between Moran Peak on the west and Mica Peak on the east. The alti-
tude of the col at Mica is hardly 10 feet above that southeast of Spangle.
Ponded waters of the Latah Valley must have backed up almost to the
village of Mica. Whether or not a considerable lake lay to the north of
the Mica col, it is certain that the ice-sheet was hard against the north-
ern flank of Moran Peak and its drainage probably passed through a
settling basin before entering the short Mica channel. A few erratics,
one of them striated, have been found in the channel, but no glacial
6 "Lake Spokane" of Large.


THE SPOKANE GLACIATION
585
stream gravel. Nor was the Mica channel eroded to any extent. Prob-
ably pondeu waters were backed up from the south until the last stages
in erosion of the North Pine Creek channel.
Vicinitv of Cheney.-Cheney lies 15 miles southwest of Spokane and
10 miles northwest of Spangle. About this town are recognizable the
same elements in the topography as already outlined the higher pre-
basalt hills, the Palouse type of maturely dissected hills, and the lower
scablands. The scablands have less relief than either of the other ele-
ments, but are much rougher. They are commonly a maze of minor
channels and depressions eroded in the basalt.
Cheney lies at the head of the largest tract of scabland on the pla-
teau-a tract which extends from Spokane River to Snake River. It is
not uninterruptedly scabland, however. It contains isolated groups of
Palouse Hills. One of the largest of these groups lies immediately north
of Cheney and has an area of about 13 square miles. Many of them are
not a square mile in area. In topography and in soil, these tracts are
identical with the Palouse wheat country to the east and southeast; but
the gentle, concave lower slopes of maturity, so characteristic of these
hills, is absent on the peripheries of the isolated groups. Instead, these
outer slopes are much steeper and are generally convex. They meet the
roughened plain of the scabland with a definite angle. The bounding
slopes clearly are much younger than the valley slopes among the hills.
The hill groups are elongated northeast-southwest, in harmony with
the elongation of the channels on the basalt surface and with the scab-
land tract as a whole. In many of these linear groups there are longi-
tudinal valleys, not of the mature type, but with steep sides and scabland
floor. All such valleys pass completely through a hill group, leading
from the rocky plain into the rolling hills and out again to the plain.
Another feature of this great scabland tract is the presence of many
widely scattered granite boulders. Nowhere (with one exception, to be
detailed later) has this foreign debris been found back among or on the
slopes of the hill groups. Associated with it, but much less common,
• are terraces of gravel composed largely of basaltic debris, but with
granite and other foreign material distributed through it. Such deposits
commonly lie on the southwest sides of rocky shoulders or hills in the
channels. They have been opened for railroad ballast and road metal at
many places over the whole scabland area.
From a survey of the patches and groups of the Palouse Hills seat-
tered over the scabland plain south of Cheney, it seems clear that they
are but remnants of a once continuous cover of the basalt, and that the
scablands have resulted from removal of the Palouse Hills by erosion in


586 J. H. BRETZ GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PLATEAU
some unusual way. The basalt of the scablands is the firm and resistant
foundation on which the hills stand. The overlying sedimentary deposit
is the formation whose etched surface constitutes the hills.
The scabland does not extend north of the Palouse Hills about Cheney
and Medical Lake, though it does extend among them in great river
channels to their northern limits. Farther north, there is neither scab-
land nor Palouse Hills. The area is a basalt plain with widely spaced
mature valleys and broad, low, flat divides. The whole is thinly covered
with glacial drift, some of it a stony till with hummocky morainic topog-
raphy, some of it washed and stratified glacial sand and gravel. The
ice-sheet clearly covered this plain. It, however, did not extend south-
ward into the scabland area, except for a minor lobe between Moran Peak
and the Cheney Hills, which reached as far south as Spangle. The asso-
ciation of broad undissected divides with shallow, mature valleys, all in
resistant rock (for example, Deep Creek and its tributaries) is anoma-
lous. It is believed to be the result of the glaciation of a tract which
possessed a typical Palouse mature topography, developed largely in a silt
or ash deposit, but etched in the deeper valleys into the surface of the
underlying basalt. The ice removed every trace of the hills in the weaker
formation, bringing the whole down to the surface of the basalt; in effect,
it cut off the hills well down to their bases without greatly modifying the
main valley bottoms.
Vicinity of Lamont. Twenty miles to the southwest of Cheney the
escaping glacial waters had become largely concentrated between Sprague
and Lamont. The eroded tract here is nearly 10 miles wide and without
a surviving Palouse hill. A sheet of torrential water must have spread
completely across the scabland between these two towns. It rapidly re-
moved the weaker material of the Palouse Hills and then scoured out
channels in the basalt. 'By the close of its occupancy it had concentrated
in certain channels and eroded them approximately 100 feet below the
surface of the basalt. Colville (Sprague) Lake lies in one of these
channels.
Between Lamont and Rock Lake, to the east, is a linear tract of
Palouse Hills about eight miles wide and traversed by but one valley
possessing bare rock in its floor and scattered granite fragments. Sepa-
rating this tract from the Palouse country of Whitman County is a great
river channel, occupied now by Rock Creek and several elongated lakes.
Rock Lake is the largest of these and, save one, is the largest and longest
lake on the Columbia Plateau of Washington. Rock Lake (see figure 5)
is bounded on both sides by sheer cliffs of basalt 200 feet and more in
height. There is no damming of consequence in the channel at the lower


THE SPOKANE GLACIATION
587
end of the lake. • Rock Lake exists because the ancient river here exca-
vated more deeply in its bed than it did a little farther down stream.
Rock Lake is typical of most lake basins of the Columbia Plateau in
Washington, in that it is a much elongated true rock-basin in an ancient
river channel in a scabland area. The only part played by glacial ice in
the formation of these basins is that of supplying the stream. Factors
essential for development of these rock-basins made by streams are (1)
large volume abruptly introduced, (2) high gradient, and (3) rock which
is closely and vertically jointed. The excavation was accomplished by
plucking, rather than by grinding.
Vicinity of Kahlotus.-About 25 miles south of the latitude of Rock
Lake the scabland is more restricted. So far as now known, all channels
but one entered Snake River in the vicinity of the present junction of
the Palouse. The one channel which escaped the control of the Palouse
system is traceable westward, by way of Washtuena, through Kahlotus,
to Esquatzel Coulee at Connell. It is a splendid abandoned channel, in
places 250 to 300 feet deep. Throughout its length it has all the char-
acters of the channels of the scabland tract to the east and northeast
except that it does not lie in such a tract. It probably was sufficiently
deep at the inception of the flood to contain the waters which came its
way. A few miles above the junction of Washtuena Coulee, Esquatzel
Coulee has none of these characters, but possesses the broad, graded
slopes of maturity.
Vicinity of Sprague. The westernmost channels among the Palouse
Hills near Cheney which discharged to the Palouse system enter the
broad scabland between Sprague and Fishtrap. The roughness of these
channel floors, due to the gashed basalt, is in striking contrast with the
smooth flowing contours of the inclosing hills. One needs but little
imagination to see again from these hilltops the torrents of glacial waters
invading from the north and following the lower valleys southward to
join the scabland between Sprague and Lamont. These hills, like those
in the Palouse wheat lands, are composed largely of a fine-tertured
unindurated sediment, probably of lacustrine origin.?
It does not seem probable that any water, other than that which occu-
pied Washtuna Coulee, escaped westward from the Palouse drainage
during the Spokane epoch. There are two possible routes, however, of
such discharge, namely, one by way of Keystone, near the lower end of
Colville (Sprague) Lake and Ritzville; the other by way of Ralston.
Both enter Lind Coulee at Lind. The altitude at the head of the Ritz-
iM. R. Campbell: Guidebook of the Western United States. Part A: The Northern
l'acific Route. U. S. Geol. Survey, Bull. 611, 1915, p. 168.


588 J. H. BRETZ- GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PLATEAU
ville route is 53 feet above the surface of Colville Lake in the adjacent
scabland, and Ralston is not 100 feet above the floor of the Cow Creek
channel. Along both routes are deposits of stream gravel. Yet no scour
of the floor by glacial waters, nor steepened valley walls, nor scattered
erratic boulders or cobbles were seen.? It is possible that these routes
were used for but a short time early in the glacial flooding, or it may be
that the gravels are older than the Spokane glaciation. It may be, also,
that the gravels in channels near Winona and Lacrosse, south of Rock
Lake, are of pre-Spokane age.
The scablands of the Palouse drainage, with channeled basalt, deposits
of stratified gravel, and isolated linear groups of Palouse Hills, their
marginal slopes steepened notably, bear abundant evidence of a great
flood of glacial waters from the north. This flood was born of the Spo-
kane ice-sheet. Its gradient was high, averaging, perhaps, 25 feet to the
mile, and it swept more than 400 square miles of the region clean of the
weaker material constituting the Palouse Hills. The hills which have
disappeared averaged 200 feet in height, and in some places the glacial
torrents eroded 100 to 200 feet into the basalt. This flood originated at
several places along the ice-front. Great river channels exist among the
remaining hills in the flood-swept region. The area overridden by the
ice itself has lost every trace of Palouse Hills. 10
CRIB CREEK DRAINAGE
General statement. By at least ten different routes, glacial waters
from the Spokane ice-sheet west of Cheney and Medical Lake converged
to Crab Creek. Another discharge way, still farther west, that of Moses
Coulee, found its own way to the Columbia above the entrance of Crab
Creek drainage. The glacial streams tributary to Crab Creek, named
from east to west, were Rock Creek (Lincoln County), the headwaters
8 M. M. Leighton: The road building sands and gravels of Washington. Wash. Geol.
Survey, Bull. 22, 1912, pp. 101-105. Leighton clearly recognizes that the Spokane re-
gion had been glaciated (p. 246), that numerous glacial drainage courses exist on the
plateau (p. 34), and that the scablands are due to erosion of the sedimentary material
by escaping glacial waters (p. 279).
• Campbell. op. cit.. also notes the absence of the granite boulders along the Northern
Pacific Railroad, which follows the Ritzville route, west of the lower end of Colville
Lake
10 Explanation should here be made of certain glacial deposits which are older than
the Spokane drift. In an abandoned clay pit near the Cheney Normal School is a very
old clayey till first reported by Frank Leverett (Bull. Geol. Soc. Am.. vol. 28. 1016. y
143).
It contains striated quartzite boulders and cobbles. One such boulder also has
fine chatter-marks on it.
Granite is present, but is crumbling or etched to such an ex.
tent that no ice-marked surfaces remain. This till also Is exposed along roadsides south
and east of Granite Lake, and striated erraties have been found back in the mature
valleys of this hill group. It seems probable that the old till underlies much of these


THE SPOKANE GLACIATION
589
of Crab Creek, Coal Creek, Duck Creek, Lake Creek, an unnamed creek
west of Lake Creek, Connawai Creek, Wilson Creek, Spring Coulee, and
Grand Coulee. The first eight originated from the ice on the northern
rim of the plateau between Hellgate and Medical Lake. The other two
entered the plateau from the Columbia Valley by one route, upper Grand
Coulee, and separated at Coulee City. The location of the edge of the
Spokane ice near the head of Grand Coulee is as yet unknown.
The glacial river courses are all youthful canyons in basalt. 'They are
quite unlike the associated drainage lines of comparable length which
never received glacial waters and which are typical valleys in maturity.
The youthful canyons, however, were not eroded by the streams which
occupy them. Despite their size, most of them are but the deepened
channels of ice-born rivers, and not true valleys. Like the scablands of
the Palouse region, invading, but short-lived, floods traversed the area;
but they failed in the main to produce broad, stream-scoured surfaces of
bare rock. Where they entered preglacial valleys in basalt they were not
able to broaden them much. Extensive scablands have been formed only
where the preglacial drainage pattern was eroded in a weak, super-basalt
sedimentary deposit.
The limits reached by the Spokane ice-sheet west of Cheney and Med-
ical Lake are not well known, since there is no morainal ridging along
the margin. The approximate boundary, as shown on the accompanying
map, has been located along the southern limits of a basalt plain with
much bare rock and a scattering of glacial debris. South of this margin
are unglaciated loess-covered hills of mature aspect and the scoured, and
in many places canyon-like, glacial drainage channels. The limits as
drawn are, perhaps, too far south in places. The ice is not known to
have crossed the Columbia between Hellgate and the head of Grand
Coulee. It did cross, however, in Douglas County, farther west, and ad-
vanced far enough to discharge its waters into Moses Coulee. The Wis-
hills. The till is covered with several feet of loess at Cheney. The loess is deep on all
Palouse Hills of eastern Washington, but does not occur on the scablands or on the
glaciated plain to the north. It therefore is older than the Spokane glaciation. Since
this Cheney till is beneath the loess and probably underlies the Palouse Hills, it is
much older than the mature topography.
There is no more suggestion of glacial over-
riding in the shapes of these hills north of Cheney than there is in the typical Palouse
region of Whitman County.
On the other hand, certain large pre-basalt hills west of Medical Lake, rising high
above the Palouse Hills of the region, do show a prevailingly steep northern slope and
gentle southern slope, as though they had been overriden by glacial ice. If this profile
has had such an origin, it must be ascribed to the pre-Spokane, pre-loess glaciation
The glacial till reported by lardee (op. cit.) at "scores" of places over large parts of
Lincoln, Spokane, and Adams counties, and as far south as Kahlotus, probably is simi-
larly related to the loess which deeply mantles the Palouse Hills of those counties


590 J. H. BRETZ--GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PLATEAU
consin glaciation of northern Douglas County was more extensive than
the Spokane and obliterated all records left by the Spokane ice.
There are scablands in the northern part of some of these spillways,
notably between Davenport and Rocklyn and in the vicinity of Telford.
The detailed relations of the largest, at and southwest of Telford, are
not vet well known; but concentration in preexisting valleys in basalt
was completed in most cases within 10 miles or so of the edge of the ice,
and rock-walled canyons with elongated lakes in the bottoms are the rule.
The altitudes of the heads of these spillways are not the same, and had
not the ice been hard against the unglaciated hills south of the basalt
plain, marginal drainage would have carried all waters to the lowest of
the group.
Gravel deposits and scattered granite boulders and cobbles are well
distributed in these coulees. Gravels are chiefly of basalt and appear as
fresh as in the scablands of the Palouse drainage. The terrace forms are
indefinite, wide-open gullies have dissected them, and they are but rem-
nants, perhaps miles apart, of former probably continuous fillings.
This
also is comparable to the gravels of the main Palouse channels.
Because of the prominence of cliffs in these canyons of Crab Creek
drainage, another feature is well presented--the talus piles which have
formed since the glacial streams abandoned their channels. The cliffs
are, without exception, composed of the Columbia lava, and, with very
few exceptions, the flows are horizontal or but gently inclined and possess
columnar jointing. The conditions of origin produced essentially ver-
tical cliffs, and the rock structures and arid climate have maintained
vertical faces during all subsequent wasting of the cliff and growth of
the talus.
Except in Grand Coulee and Moses Coulee, which carried Wisconsin
glacial waters also, these canyons have been occupied by inconsequential
streams since the Spokane glacial floods subsided. The present talus,
therefore, is a measure of all post-Spokane disintegration in the vertical
walls of jointed lava. In the great majority of cases the talus extends
from the rock-floor of the canyon three-fourths to four-fifths of the way
to the top (see figures 4 and 7). In the lower cliffs it has climbed even
nearer the summit, and rarely the cliff has become obliterated by the
mounting waste. The talus slopes range between 20 degrees and 30 de-
grees, with the average probably between 25 degrees and 30 degrees.
Since conditions of origin, of rock structure, and of climate are suffi-
ciently alike in the Crab Creek and Palouse drainage areas, it follows
that relative proportion of talus on lifts of comparable height may be a
raluable criterion to establish more firmly the contemporaneity of glacial


THE SPOKANE GLACIATION
591
drainage in the two areas. The cliffs of the Palouse scabland, though
less prominent on the whole than those of the Crab Creek canyons, every-
where possess the same average ratios of talus height to depth of channel
and the same degree of slope. Further use of this criterion will be made
when the Wisconsin glacial drainage channels are examined.
Grand Coulee. Grand Coulee heads in the south wall of Columbia
Valley, about 550 feet above the river. At its head it is 1,000 feet deep
and about 3 miles wide. In the middle of this valley, 10 miles from the
Columbia, stands Steamboat Rock, a basalt mesa with its square mile of
summit area at the general altitude of the plateau on either side of the
coulee. There are also numerous pre-basalt hills of granite on the floor
between Steamboat Rock and the Columbia, formerly buried in the basalt
FIGURE T. Post-Spokane Talus in "The Potholes" south of Trinidad
and later exhumed in the erosion of the coulee. About 13 miles from
the head the canyon narrows to about 2 miles and maintains this width
and a depth of about 800 feet as far south as Coulee City. Here the
canyon form is lost for 4 or 5 miles, the eastern wall descending, because
of a monoclinal flexure, until it is not more than 200 feet above the floor
of the coulee. In this broadened portion is a great abandoned cataract
with a fall of 400 feet. The width of the falls is nearly 3 miles, the full
width of the bottom of the coulee; but it was broken into two different
parts in its later history through erosion of the floor above the falls. A
central portion of the earlier floor, which escaped much of this erosion,
became an island on the brink. The western half, Dry Falls or Grand
Falls. is the more definite and in itself was a double fall at the close of
the history of this great cataract, with a "Goat Island" in the middle.
No water now flows over these falls except in times of heavy rain.


592 J. H. BRETZ_-GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PLATEAU
Below the falls the coulee again becomes a canyon, both because of the
gorge left by retreat of the falls and because the basalt surface rises in
that direction. For 15 miles or so this lower coulee is a wild, spectacular
feature, its western wall fully 1,000 feet high and its bottom less than
a mile in width. For most of this distance the ancient river flowed on
the strike of a monoclinal fold the dip of which averages 45 degrees and
is to the southeast. The falls took origin where the glacial stream passed
from horizontal flows to the tilted structure, about 3 miles below their
present location. Grand Coulee debouches in a broad, shallow structural
depression, the Quincy basin. Into this same basin discharges Crab
Creek, which carried the combined flow of all of the glacial rivers
previously listed.
As above outlined, Grand Coulee is a relatively simple affair, with two
canyoned portions separated by a shallower part, due to local structural
conditions, with a remarkable waterfall in midlength and with a part of
its lower course along tilted flows; but the preglacial conditions and the
glacial history are not as simple as in the region farther east.
There is no evidence of a preglacial drainage line along the upper
canyon between Coulee City and the Columbia. There are but two
tributary gorges in the 30 miles of this canyon and these are short and
youthful. A mature topography, untouched by glacial ice or water, lies
on the plateau to the east; with no drainage lines leading to the coulee.
To the west the plateau was glaciated to the edge of the coulee during
the Wisconsin epoch, but preglacial topographic features still control and
give no suggestion of drainage toward the coulee. Moreover, the altitude
of the basalt on the precipitous edge of the canyon is about that of the
Columbia River-Crab Creek divide; and on both sides of the coulee, near
the head, especially well shown on the unglaciated east side, is a scabland
tract (see figure 3), with the mature hills gone and the basalt etched
and roughened by a maze of anastomosing minor channels and rock-
basins, separated by low buttes and knobs. Elongated meadows, and even
lakes, mark some channel courses. No channels are more than 75. feet
deep. Glacial erratics of diorite, argillite, slate, schist, and quartzite
oceur here and there. Especially significant is the talus, which has
climbed three-fourths to four-fifths of the total original heights of the
channel walls and nowhere is steeper than 20 degrees. On the east side
this summit scabland is 3 miles wide, as wide as the floor of the coulee
itself, but 1,000 feet higher. The altitude here is about 2,500 feet
above tide.
In order that glacial waters should have spilled across this place, the
ice-sheet must have blocked the Columbia, both to the west and the east,


THE SPOKANE GLACIATION
593
else lower routes in either direction would have taken the discharge.
That it was the Spokane ice-sheet is evident from the amount of break-
ing down of cliffs since the waters ceased to flow. Searching over the
basalt, the wide glacial stream finally selected its central portion, now
Grand Coulee, for deeper trenching and withdraw from the margins.
Only Steamboat Rock records any of the original anastomosis. To what
depth the Spokane waters cut in upper Grand Coulee will be discussed
under the subject of Wisconsin glaciation.
Hartline structural valley.- The monoclinal flexure along which much
of lower Grand Coulee is eroded swings toward the east about 2 miles
north of Coulee City and extends beyond Almira toward Hellgate. An-
other fold, anticlinal in character, lies nearly parallel with it, about 5
miles to the south. The tract between is structurally and topographically
a valley and contains a gravelly plain approximately 40 square miles in
area. The floor of the coulee at Coulee City is only 200 feet below this
flat, and the entire descent to the town from the flat is across gravel.
Wells on the flat penetrate sand and gravel to comparable depths.
The drainage of the Hartline gravel plain is largely southward
through Deadmans Draw, a tributary of Spring Coulee, 10 miles east of
Grand Coulee. Deadmans Draw is but the deepest and most pronounced
of a scabland complex of abandoned channels, basins, cascades, and falls,
identical in character with and very similar in proportions to those on
the plateau along the east side of the head of Grand Coulee. Talus de-
velopment is the same. Furthermore, the patchy gravel deposits and
stranded erratic boulders tell unequivocally of glacial waters escaping
southward across the rim of the structural basin.
East of Deadmans Draw, as far as Wilson Creek, are gently rolling hills
with concave lower slopes and deep loessial soils, which have never been
touched by invading glacial waters; but between the draw and Grand
Coulee to the west, and from Coulee City south to Bacon Station, a dis-
tance of 8 miles, is a tract which for wild ruggedness is unsurpassed any-
where among the glacial spillways thus far described. The channels are
canyons and the krobs are hills 100 to 300 feet high. Stream gravel
covers the interchannel hills. The whole area was overrun by the glacial
flood out of the Hartline structural valley. Besides this, at least three
of the channel canyons lead out of Grand Coulee, below the falls, but at
about the level of the floor above the falls. It is magnified scabland of
the Palouse type. One of these channels leads. to Spring Coulee, the
others converge to Dry Coulee, a small feature debouching into the
Quincy structural basin 5 miles east of the mouth of Grand Coulee.
Some of these are truly distributary canyons. They mark a distrib-
XXXIX- -BULL. GROL. SOC. AM., VOL. 34, 1922


594 J. H. BRETZ-GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PLATEAU
utive or braided course of the Spokane glacial flood over a basalt surface
which possessed no adequate pre-Spokane valleys. Greater erosion in the
tilted basalt on the western margin of this tract finally drew these waters
off and down into what has become the lower canyon of Grand Coulee.
There is evidence at the lower end of Grand Coulee that a short pre-
Spokane valley was entered a little north of Soap Lake. This lake lies
at the mouth of the coulee, where the canyon crosses a low anticline.
'The syncline between it and the main monocline to the north is low and
wide open as a structural valley at the east to the Quincy basin. Some
drainage did go through here, but most of it crossed the anticline -a
thing which would not have been possible if an antecedent drainage line
had not existed at this place.
• The original slope on which the glacial waters flowed from the Colum-
bia Valley to the Quincy structural basin was steplike in a general way,
a steeper descent existing between the plateau summit to the north and
the Hartline basin, and another such on the northern margin of the
Quincy basin. These steeper slopes were determined by structure,
though they did not conform exactly to it. The monoclinal fold north
of the Hartline basin has a maximum dip of 30 degrees. If the slope
which the Spokane waters found was only one-third of this, that glacial
river, in effectiveness over this stretch, must have been an enormous
mountain torrent. The vertically and closely jointed basalt must have
been eroded with great rapidity, and, where favorable conditions for
sapping were discovered in the channels, falls developed and retreated
much more rapidly even than Niagara.
While the talus in the higher abandoned channels reaches up three-
fourths to four-fifths of the total original height of the cliffs, that in
Grand Coulee itself is only halfway up the cliffs (where the flows are
horizontal) and has an almost invariable slope of 35 degrees. It clearly
dates from the Wisconsin glaciation, not the Spokane.
Quincy Valley or Basin.- The Quincy structural basin is bounded on
the south by the Frenchman Hills anticline, but its drainage escapes
southward around the east end of this fold. All glacial drainage routes
of the plateau west of Medical Lake, except Moses Coulee, have been
traced to it. Enormous quantities of basaltic debris have been swept out
of the hundreds of miles of such channels and into this catch-basin. The
fill covers 600 square miles and the maximum known thickness is about
#00 feet. The lower three-fourths of this fill is clay, silt, and sand,
doubtless lacustrine in origin. In this have been found shells of fresh-
water boreal mollusks.11 Only the upper 100 feet, approximately, are
11 Schwenneson and Meinzer: Ground water in Quincy Valley, Washington. U. $.
Geol. Survey, Water Supply Paper 425 E, 1918, p. 143.


THE SPOKANE GLACIATION
595
river gravels. About the margin of the basin the gravel is thinner and
rests directly on the basalt. The aggradational plain now is dissected
by stream-cut valleys which lead southward to a group of very irregular
channels eroded in basalt around the eastern nose of the Frenchman
Hills anticline and thence west to the Columbia between this fold and
the parallel Saddle Mountains anticline. Though this drainage line is
named Crab Creek, no surface waters from Crab Creek above the Quincy
basin now reach it. Dunes of basaltic sand have closed the lower part
of these converging valleys and thus formed Moses Lake.
The group of channels around the end of Frenchman Hills anticline
will here be termed the Drumheller channels (see figure 8). The altitude
of the basalt floor at the head of these channels is 950 feet and the high-
est altitude over which the water clearly flowed is about 1,200 feet. The
group begins as three canyons of nearly equal dimensions, but for most
of its length only two dominant canyoned channels exist, one containing
a narrow elongated lake, the other containing Crab Creek. The depth
of these canyons averages 200 feet. The whole area, however, is scored
and gashed by hundreds of similar smaller channels. The two main
gorges separate on an accordant level and unite 4 miles downstream,
again accordantly, but 100 feet lower than their point of separation.
South of the Frenchman Hills anticline, Crab Creek Valley turns
abruptly west and follows the syncline between this fold and Saddle
Mountains anticline to Columbia River at Beverly. A capacious, unin-
terrupted old river course of low gradient exists along this syncline. It
is repeatedly referred to in the literature as the lower part of the Grand
Coulee route of the diverted Columbia; and certainly the stream which
eroded the two dominant channels of the Drumheller plexus took this
course; but at an earlier date, before the present Drumheller channels
had been eroded, glacial waters also continued directly southward to pass
the east end of Saddle Mountain anticline as well. Channeled scabland
and stream gravel with granitic material cover 150 square miles of the
region south of the end of this fold. As in the Palouse scabland, hills
of mature topography and deep soils, developed in a weak sedimentary
(presumably the Ellensburg formation) above the basalt, flank the scab-
land and are isolated in it. Some of the glacial waters entered Esquatzel
Coulee and some went by way of Koontz Coulee to the Columbia near
Ringgold. Indeed, Esquatzel Coulee below Connell has been eroded in
the scabland subsequent to the maximum flooding.
'The waters around the tip of the Saddle Mountain anticlinal nose
never cut deeper than 900 feet above tide, while the head of the syn-
clinal course just below the Drumheller plexus is eroded in basalt to 700


596 J. H. BRETZ- -GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PLATEAU
• • 80C
700
**contour
FIGURE 8.- Part of Drumheller Channels Plexus
Channels indicated by arrows; rock-basins in black


THE SPOKANE GLACIATION
597
feet above tide. Using the criterion of talus accumulation, most of the
Drumheller channels and the existing synclinal river valley date from
the Wisconsin glaciation, while the spillway around the east end of
Saddle Mountain was formed during the Spokane glaciation. Chan-
neled scabland also lies east of the youthful Drumheller channels and at
a higher altitude. It apparently belongs to the Spokane spillways.
It appears, therefore, that when Spokane waters escaped southward
from the Quincy basin there was no noteworthy valley for lower Crab
Creek and, as in the Palouse country, the flood spread out and found its
way among the hills of weaker rock. These hills were removed in the
Drumheller tract for a width of more than 10 miles. South of Saddle
Mountain the width of the scoured tract is equally great. The flood
separated into two parts after passing Frenchman Hills anticline, part
continuing south to Esquatzel and Koontz coulees and part turning west
in the Beverly syncline. The westward course was eroded more deeply
than the southward, so that when, in the succeeding Wisconsin diversion,
another flood swept through the Drumheller plexus all of it went west-
ward. The striking features of the present plexus, adjusted to the floor
of the synclinal route, were then produced.
Two other outlets for the Quincy basin existed during the Spokane
epoch. They are at Frenchman Springs and "The Potholes," two great
notches in the wall of Columbia Valley on the western margin of the
plateau. Each is an abandoned cataract, to which short channels lead
across the western rim of the Quincy basin. "The Potholes" is the best
example mapped of a receding waterfall over lava flows which is known
to the writer (figure 9). The ancient stream spilled over the Columbia
cliffs at an altitude of about 1,200 feet above tide and descended at least
400 feet over two great rock terraces, each with a scarp of about 200 feet.
In the upper cliff is exposed a very conspicuous flow with exceptionally
large, well developed, and uniform columns approaching 75 feet in
length. The flow which holds up the edge of the lower rock terrace is
more than 100 feet thick and is composed of uniformly small columns
from bottom to top.
The amount of recession in the waterfall is quite unequal in the two
rock terraces. In the upper the cataract was double from its beginning,
the two parts being nearly equal and receding side by side for nearly two
miles. This parallel recession left a great blade of rock a mile and a half
long, 1,000 feet wide, and 375 feet in maximum height between them.
A huge elongated pothole was left by the recession of each member of
the twin upper falls, deepest and widest below the falls. There are great
gravel bars in these potholes, especially in the downstream portions.
The one below the southern fall is 200 feet thick (figure 10).


School No 27
g
Fierpe
9.- «The Potholes" near Trinidad. Washington
598 J. H. BRETZ- GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PLATEAU


THE SPOKANE GLACIATION
599
The lava flow which causes the lower rock terrace is much more resist-
ant to plucking and sapping than is the upper terrace. This is shown
both in the Columbia Valley and in "The Potholes." The current which
emerged from the Potholes themselves spread considerably over this ter-
race and spilled over its edge in a broad sheet which later became some-
what concentrated in four or five different places, so that minor notching
of the edge of the terrace resulted; but none of these notches was cut
back more than a quarter of a mile.
Above and east of the upper falls is a scabland tract extending two
miles farther east across the low rim of the structural basin and very
much diversified by ramifying channels and their separating hills.
Rock-basins are common, some of them being 40 feet deep. This chan-
FIGURE 10-One of "The Potholes"
'The gravel bar (terrace on left) is 200 feet thick and the clift back of it is 200 feet
high. Vlew Is taken looking toward the ancient cataract.
neled traet was an island-studded rapids descending to the brink of "The
Potholes" cataract. At the beginning of the cataract this channeled
area extended to the original edge of the upper terrace. As the twin
falls, narrower than the channel group, receded eastward, some of these
channels were left along the edge of the gorge.
The talus accumulations of "The Potholes" are somewhat irregular
in height, because of unusually marked differences among the flows in
the cliffs, but the large majority constitute three-fourths or more of the
total height of the cliffs (see figure Y. "The Potholes" cataract was
formed at the time of the Spokane glaciation by discharge from the
Quiney basin. The Columbia Valley here was nearly or quite as deep
at that time as it is today. The structural basin was aggraded to the
level of this western rim and gravel was carried completely across from


600 J. H. BRETZ GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PITEAU
Crab Creek and Grand Coulee. As in the Hartline structural basin, the
Spokane floods found the depression only partially. filled, but left it
brimming over with waste.
The Frenchman Springs cataract, 8 miles south of "The Potholes,"
functioned at the same time and developed a double fall also, but carried
a smaller quantity of water. The northern of the two falls here outran
the southern in its recession and at the close of the history of the cataract
was carrying all of the discharge.
Why did not Wisconsin waters use the Frenchman Springs and Pot-
holes cataracts? There are two possible answers: (1) Spokane dis-
charge through Drumheller Channels eroded this spillway more than it
did the rapids above either of the two cataracts, and (2) post-Spokane
but pre-Wisconsin warping depressed the Drumheller tract relative to
the channels above the two cataracts enough to cause complete Wisconsin
diversion to' the southern route; and, of course, it is possible that some
combination of both occurred.
MOSES COULEE
This coulee (not to be confused with the valley which contains Moses
Lake) ranks second in spectacular proportions only to Grand Coulee.
It lies a few miles west of Grand Coulee and leads southwestward directly
to the Columbia, 10 miles above "The Potholes." Its length of 10 miles
is divisible into three portions, an upper and a lower canyon separated
by a broad, shallow tract in a synclinal valley. The upper canyon is
eroded in the gentle southward dip slope of this part of the plateau. Its
depth averages about 200 feet. Dip of the basalt is greater than descent
of coulee floor. The inclosing walls thus become lower until they vir-
tually disappear and the floor of the canyon becomes the floor of the
synclinal valley. Here the coulee turns abruptly to the west and follows
.the axis of the syncline for 6 miles. At Palisades it turns southward
again and leaves the syncline to cross a broad uplifted area, or flat-topped
anticline, the Badger Mountain fold. The lower canyon across this fold
is 900 feet deep.
The lower canyon has been extended upstream by headward erosion
about half the length of the synclinal portion. Here it abruptly ends at
the foot of a cliff across the coulee. Two great castellated buttresses face
down the coulee, with lesser walls connecting them. This notched cliff
clearly was a waterfall, and before the deep notching it was comparable
in height to Grand Falls at Coulee City.
From this transcoulee cliff to the lower end of the upper canyon is a
tract, 5 or 6 miles long and nearly as wide, where the basalt floor of the
syncline was widely overrun by a great stream which formed a complex


THE SPOKANE GLACIATION
601
of anastomosing channels with rock-basins and cataracts, leaving isolated
knobs and buttes irregularly disposed in a perfect maze (see figure 1).
Bare rock or rocky talus covers the area, whereas both canyoned portions
have no rock-floor exposed. There is a total descent of 600 feet along
this tract. Most of the channels have noteworthy talus accumulations,
amounting to three-fourths or four-fifths of the total depths. Only the
lower and central channels bear talus comparable to that in Grand Coulee
and Drumheller channels. Erratics of granite, quartzites, etcetera, lie
here and there, even on the highest of these eroded surfaces.
In the upper canyon, north of the moraine built by the Okanogan lobe
during the Wisconsin glaciation, talus is but halfway up the cliffs. Be-
low the moraine some talus piles seem to be of Spokane age, some of
Wisconsin, and there is other evidence that Wisconsin waters only par-
tially cleaned away the preexisting cliff waste. In the lower canyon the
talus dates back to the Spokane epoch. If there is any record of Wis-
consin waters, it is in the gravel fill, more than 200 feet deep, 3 miles
from the head of this canyon, and possibly in the existence of a promi-
nent rock terrace, not more than 100 feet above the aggraded floor of
the canyon, a few miles south of Palisades. If trenching by Wisconsin
waters was performed anywhere in the lower canyon, it was in the
production of this terrace.
Moses Coulee, as a drainage line, antedates the Spokane glaciation.
Tributary valleys, well developed in the basalt, are recognizable as far
north as Mansfield, and the upper canyon itself extends 6 or 8 miles
north of the Wisconsin terminal moraine; but the best evidence is in the
lower coulee. The cliffs here are deeply notched by wide-open V-shaped
tributary valleys. Many notches are two-thirds or more as deep as the
main canyon. These notches give the cliffs a striking resemblance to a
series of great rounded gables in alignment (figure 11). The slopes of
these tributary gorges are graded and covered with sage and grass. Rock
ledges in them are rare. They clearly are the relics of a pre-Spokane
drainage line, the trunk valley of which was entered and greatly enlarged
by the Spokane waters. Both widening and deepening in the basalt oc-
curred and the tributaries were left hanging. They have since attained
topographic adjustment by building large alluvial fans out on the canyon
floor. Furthermore, Moses Coulee crosses the Badger Mountain fold, as
already noted. Like the crossing of the Soap Lake anticline by Grand
Coulee, this records an antecedent course determined long before the
Spokane glaciation.
Spokane waters could not have entered Moses Coulee if the parent ice-
sheet had not pushed across or at least well up on the divide south of the


602 J. H. BRETZ GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PLATEAU
Columbia. Therefore, though no till or striz left by the Spokane ice are
known on the south side of the Columbia west of Grand Coulee, the oper-
ation of both Moses and Grand coulees proves that Cordilleran ice did
cross the Columbia, and the Spokane features of Moses Coulee prove that
it reached nearly as far south as it did in the later Wisconsin epoch.
FIgURE 11.-Cliffs of lower Moses Coulec
The cliffs are 900 feet high. There are shown the pre-Spokane tributary valleys, the
main canyon of Spokane age, and the post-Spokane talus.
The Wisconsin GLaciation
The terminal moraine deposited by the Cordilleran ice-sheet in north-
eastern Washington during the Wisconsin glaciation has been traced in
part by Salisbury and student assistants.1: The ice reached the Colum-
bia Plateau in two places. One of these was south of the capacious
Okanogan River Valley, and the lobe which spread out on the plateau
here reached 35 miles beyond the river and was nearly 50 miles wide.
The other place was on the lower Spokane River and was of little conse-
quence. The only noteworthy Wisconsin drainage derangement of the
entire plateau was the reoccupation of Grand Coulee and lower Crab
Creek. Through this route was poured the water from the Cordilleran
ice-sheet along the entire front from the Rocky Mountains to the
Okanogan lobe. Though the Spokane ice yielded much greater volumes
of water, all told, than did the Wisconsin, it was carried by many valleys,
no one of which ever contained the quantity which went through Grand
Coulee during the later diversion. That flood was greater than the deep-
13 R. D. Salisbury: Glacial work in the western mountains in 1901. Jour. Geol., vol.
9, 1901, pp. 121-723.
George Garrey: Glaciation between the Rockles and the Cascades. Master's thesis.
in library of Department of Geology, University of Chicago.


THE WISCONSIN GLACIATION
603
ened main channel of the Grand Coulee system could contain and all
but one of the distributary canyons again were in operation. The level
of the Hartline gravel plain was not reached, however, and Deadmans
Draw remained untouched. The evidences for this conclusion are the
character of the talus in Deadmans Draw, already outlined, and the
gravel deposits in and at the mouth of Dry Coulee. These latter deserve
a brief description.
The gravel terraces of Crab Creek Valley above the junction of Dry
Coulee, at Adrian, are fragmentary remnants in protected places and in
general do not have sharp terrace forms. Most of the valley floor is at
the floodplain level; but 3 or 4 miles east of Adrian the floodplain is
narrowed almost to obliteration by a great gravel fill whose surface is
about 100 feet above the valley bottom. The creek here flows in a narrow
inner valley, close to the southern wall of the rock-cut main valley. The
surface of the gravel fill rises northward across the width of the main
valley and continues up Dry Coulee, which in its lower part. is likewise
nearly filled. Though there is little difference in amount of weathering
between this gravel deposit and the Spokane gravel in Crab Creek Valley
east of Dry Coulee, it clearly is much younger in terms of erosion. Its
dissection has just begun. It is traceable back up Dry Coulee to the
three distributary canyons which lead southward out of the upper walls
of Grand Coulee. In all probability it is a deposit made by the Wis-
consin, floods before the lower canyon of Grand Coulee was deepened
sufficiently to take care of the entire discharge.
Lower Grand Coulee therefore appears not to have been much deeper
at the beginning of the Wisconsin discharge than the floor of these dis-
tributary canyons. Grand Falls probably was formed during this epoch,
taking origin at the head of Blue Lake, where the coulee begins its course
in the tilted flows of the monoclinal flexure. This cataract has receded
about 3 miles to that portion known as Dry Falls, west of Coulee City,
and about 5 miles to the less pronounced falls at the head of Deep Lake,
about a mile south of Coulee City. They could not have existed farther
down the coulee, for there it is eroded on the strike of flows whose dip,
on the average, is 45 degrees. 13
Previous descriptions of the relation of the Okanogan lobe to Grand
Coulee state that the ice-sheet deployed eastward only to the edge of the
upper canyon; but the granite knobs in Grand Coulee above Steamboat
Rock are strongly glaciated down at least to the level of the present
13 O. E. Meinzer, in "The glacial history of Columbia River in the Big Bend region*
(Jour. Wash. Acad. Sciences, vol. 8, 1918, pp. 411-412), argues that the falls have
receded for 17 miles, virtually the full length of the lower coulee


604 J. H. BRETZ GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PLATEAU
aggraded floor. The northwest sides of these hills are notably smoothed
and rounded and some bear stria. The orientation varies, as would be
expected on rugged rock hills overridden by ice, but is not far from
northwest-southeast. The southeast sides are steep and jagged. The
sheeted structure of the granite apparently has lent itself to plucking by
the ice. Furthermore, the summits of the basalt bluff's on the western
side of the coulee also are striated in approximately the same directions,
and stria and abundant large granite erratics are reported on the top of
Steamboat Rock (figure 12).
The glaciation of these granite hills and the basalt hill south of them
occurred at the maximum deployment of the Wisconsin ice on the pla-
teau. It can not be a record of the Spokane glaciation, for these granite
FiGURE 12.- Steamboat Rock
Steamboat Rock is in the middle of the Grand Coulee and near the head. The talus is
of post-Wisconsin age.
hills then were buried hundreds of feet beneath basalt and have been
exhumed by the erosion of both Spokane and Wisconsin glacial drainage.
If it be argued that this exhumation occurred during the early stages of
the Spokane glaciation, the ice later advancing into the head of Grand
Coulee, the answer is that these exposed glaciated surfaces would have
been obliterated during the interglacial interval.
What became of the Wisconsin drainage when the Okanogan lobe
crowded down into the head of Grand Coulee? Since the Spokane spill-
ways to Palouse River are lower than all others on the plateau except
Grand Coulee, and since there was an eastward route open to them in
front of the Wisconsin ice, it might be expected that for a short time
glacial drainage would be diverted to the Palouse. • But reexamination
of these spillways has found no signs of such occupation. Furthermore,


THE WISCONSIN GLACIATION
.
605
the granite hills in the coulee close to the eastern wall do not show glacial
'moothing, though all others do. This is interpreted to mean that the
escaping waters kept a passage open along the eastern edge of the ice,
which thus failed to close the coulee completely. All the water at this
time flowed on the east side of Steamboat Rock, and perhaps the eastern
wall of the canyon here was eroded back to expose the unglaciated granite
hills and to make the greater width which the canyon possesses between
Steamboat Rock and the Columbia.14
A widespread submergence of the lower Columbia Valley is known to
have occurred during the Wisconsin glaciation.1 It is recorded by berg-
floated erratic boulders, some of great size, scattered widely in the Co-
lumbia Valley below the present altitude of about 1,250 feet above tide.
The submergence was due to a lowering of the entire region relative to
sealevel. The ponded waters rose sufficiently high to spread over consid-
erable areas of the plateau, and glaciated boulders now are found where
glacial ice or glacial streams could not possibly have transported them.
Most of these boulders, and all of the large ones, are of granite. Ther
are strikingly abundant in some parts of the Quincy basin, a distribution
which points to Grand Coulee as the route by which they reached the
basin. After one has seen the dozens of granite knobs in upper Grand
Coulee, heavily glaciated on the northwest and apparently much plucked
on the southeast, the conviction grows that most of these large granite
fragments were quarried in the head of the coulee when the Okanogan
lobe was at its maximum deployment. The ground moraine of the
Okanogan lobe has but a small percentage of granite boulders compared
with basalt boulders, and a still smaller percentage of large granites com-
pared with large basalts. It appears, therefore, that some special condi-
tion, such as that outlined above, must have existed to reverse the ratio
among the berg-floated boulders.
The upper limit of these erratics earlier reported was 1,283 feet above
tide, and in the eastern part of the Quincy basin none have since been
found above that altitude; but on Babcock Ridge, near Trinidad, boulders
of gneiss, granite, quartzite, schist, slate, and argillite have recently been
found as high as 1,350 feet above tide. On the hills northeast of Trin-
idad a "nest" of twelve granite fragments from an inch to 16 inches in
diameter and one quartzite pebble have been found--all within a radius
of 15 feet and at an altitude of 1,100 feet above tide. These seem clearly
1 K. Oestreich ("Die Grande Coulée," Transcontinental Exeursion of 1912, American
Geographic Society, 1915, pp. 259-274) has suggested, and J. T. Pardee ("Glaciation in
the Cordilleran region," Science, vol.
56, December 15, 1922, pp. 686-687) has asserted,
that an ice-stream traversed Grand Coulee.
18 J. H. Bretz: The late Pleistocene submergence in the Columbia Valley of Oregon
and Washington. Jour. Geol., vol. 27, 1919, pp. 489-506.


606 J. H. BRETZ--GLACIAL DRAINAGE 1,~ COLUMBIA PLATEAU
to have been carried here in floating ice. Either the upper limit of the.
submergence was greater over the plateau than has been thought or there
has been post-Wisconsin upwarping in the vicinity of Trinidad. The
latter seems the more probable.
Pardee has described a deposit of silt with sand and gravel, the Nes-
pelem formation 16 in the Columbia Valley above Grand Coulee. This
he believes to be of Wisconsin age and to have been caused by a lowering
of the region such that the upper surface of the deposit (1,700 feet above
tide) records the sealevel of that time. What is taken to be a part of
this formation lies on the floor of Grand Coulee about Steamboat Rock
and the granite hills. Its upper surface here is about 1,650 feet above
tide and it is seasonally banded. From its position, it obviously was
deposited after the margin of the Okanogan lobe and the diverted glacial
Columbia had abandoned Grand Coulee. It therefore was deposited after
the berg-borne debris had been carried through the coulee. None of this
silt has been recognized in the Quincy Valley or in the Columbia Valley
below the Okanogan lobe. It may be a record of the submergence, as
are the berg-carried erratics. It also may be related to the ponding of
the Columbia by the Okanogan lobe, or by the large Wisconsin Valley
train from the Okanogan Valley, which Pardee describes and which was
formed during the retreat of the Cordilleran ice-sheet.
Most of the fill of the Quincy structural basin, as shown by well
records, is clay and silt. The Pleistocene boreal mollusks reported from
the upper part of the clay? suggest that it was deposited while a glacial
climate prevailed, but probably not when the glacial waters were being
discharged across the northern rim of the plateau, for the gravels over-
lying the clays were then carried into the basin.
There appears to be one great summit plane of the gravels, now dis-
sected into four parts. The altitude of the northern part of each terrace
is about 1,250 feet above tide. The surface (restored) slopes toward the
Frenchman Springs and Potholes cataracts on the western margin of the
basin and toward the Drumheller plexus on the southern margin. A
continuous grade exists westward into the bottoms of the eroded channels
at the head of the cataracts, but to the south the gravel terrace is 150
feet above the floor of Crab Creek Valley immediately adjacent and as
high as the basalt buttes among the channel heads.
This gravel fill probably dates back to the Spokane epoch, though some
of it may have been aggraded during the early part of the Wisconsin
16 J. T. Pardee: Geology and mineral deposits of the Colville Indian reservation,
Washington. U. S. Geol. Survey, Bull, 67T, 1918, pp. 28-29 and 47-50.
11 Schwerneson and Meinzer: Ground water in Quincy Valley, Washington. U. S.
Geol. Survey, Water Supply Paper 425 E, 1918, pp. 143-144.


THE WISCONSIN GLACIATION
607
diversion, as that at Adrian, where Crab Creek was completely blocked by
Wisconsin gravel. The basin fill is not dissected, however, as are Spokane
gravel terraces in the upper Crab Creek drainage. This may be because
it does not lie in a narrow valley and because it is very porous, absorbing
all rainfall and allowing no surface streams to form. The dissection
takes the form of three large meridional channels converging to the
Drumheller plexus. 'Two of these lead from the mouth of Grand Coulee;
the third and easternmost leads from upper Crab Creek near the mouth
of Dry Coulee. It seems probable that, though some interglacial trench-
ing by Crab Creek occurred, these channels were eroded largely by the
diverted Columbia during the Wisconsin epoch, the erosion being ren-
dered possible because of the contemporaneous deepening of the two main
Drumheller channels. The western channel is broad but much shallower
than the other two. Its proportions indicate that it is the channel of a
large stream, not the valley of a small one, and its shallowness indicates
that it was abandoned early in the Wisconsin dissection of the fill.
The mouth of Grand Coulee is an undrained depression containing
Soap Lake. It is dammed by the gravel deposits in Quincy Valley. All
drainage of the lower canyon of Grand Coulee comes to it, upper Crab
Creek flows to it (when it flows at all), and the neighboring gravel plain,
through an are of 180 degrees, from east through south to west, slopes
'back toward it. The slope in this arc is gentle and clearly constructional.
Whether this back slope is wholly of Wisconsin age or dates in part from
the Spokane epoch, it seems clear that it is a graded subfluvial slope,
adjusted to the traction load and the velocity of a current emerging
from Grand Coulee. The velocity here was greatest within the rock walls
of Soap Lake and decreased rapidly as the waters spread out in the
Quincy basin.. The depth of that glacial stream can not be measured,
however, by the difference in altitude of lake floor and gravel rim. Dur-
ing the later stages of Wisconsin discharge, as the Drumheller channels
were gashed more deeply and the three channels eroded across Quincy
basin fill, notches appeared in the rim of the gravel barrier and the con-
stricted portion containing Soap Lake probably was then deepened.
In all gravels in glacial spillways across the Columbia plateau, basalt
is by far the most important constituent. Only a small fraction of 1
per cent is of other material. It therefore is not to be considered as
glacial outwash in the ordinary sense, for it has not come from the
Cordilleran glacial drift. It represents basalt eroded by the high-gra-
dient glacial streams in producing scablands and canyoned coulees.
Thus a brief episode in the latter half of the Pleistocene (the maxi-
mum of the Spokane glaciation) introduced conditions under which the


608 J. HI. BRETZ GLACIAL DRAINAGE ON COLUMBIA PLATEAU
scablands, much more than a thousand square miles of the plateau, and
more than a tenth of the total area of the plateau (as the term is used
in this paper) have been denuded of overlying sedimentary deposits by
running water. But, despite the enormous amount of erosion by escaping
glacial waters in both Spokane and Wisconsin epochs, no permanent
derangement of drainage lines, save that of the Palouse from Hooper to
Snake River, resulted.. The Palouse formerly flowed to Esquatzel Coulee
by way of Washtuena Coulee. Its course to Snake River was shortened
50 miles by this diversion, probably during the Spokane epoch.
The Wisconsin history of Drumheller channels and Moses Coulee has
been outlined in the description of these features under "Spokane Glacia-
tion." It remains to note that the small amount of erosion in the syn-
clinal plexus of Moses Coulee and the small valley train built by drainage
from the tip of the Okanogan lobe suggest that this lobe may have evap-
orated in considerable part. This suggestion of large evaporation may
also explain the relatively small amount of Wisconsin water which came
from the Cordilleran ice east of the Okanogan lobe.
DISCUSSION
Dr. M. M. LEIGHTON: The speaker is to be congratulated on the char-
acter of the work he has done in eastern Washington. A few years ago
I had the opportunity to see some of the features which he describes, and
the case for at least two glaciations is perfectly clear and, as he suggests,
there may have been three. In support of this, I may say that in a gravel
pit in the southwestern part of Spokane I found balls of apparently old
glacial till in what seemed to be gravel of Spokane age.
Mr. OSCAR E. MeINzeR: I was especially interested in this excellent
paper, because of my own brief field work a few years ago in this region.
The glacial features of the region are on a grand scale and very striking.
I understand that in the Spokane Stage the lake in Quiney Valley dis-
charged directly into the gorge of the Columbia and also through the
outlet east of Frenchman Hills, and that the latter was over lava rock.
How is the deep trenching of the plain in Quincy Valley during the
Wisconsin Stage accounted for?
Author's reply to Mr. Meinzer: Only the upper or gravelly part of
the Quincy Valley fill is surely of Spokane age. Wisconsin waters added
but little to this deposit. They eroded it instead, because of downcutting
in the basalt at the Drumheller Channels at this time. All the remark-
able features of that tract are in basalt and were produced largely by
Wisconsin waters.
Brief remarks were also made by Mr. Leverett, with reply by the author.
