VOLUME XXXI
NUMBER 8
THE
JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY
November- December 1923
THE CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE
COLUMBIA PLATEAU
J HARLEN BRETZ
University of Chicago
OUTLINE
DEFINITION OF "ScaBLaND"
PHYSIOGRAPHIC RELATIONS OF THE CHANNELED SCABLANDS
GENERALIZED STATEMENT OF THE ORIGIN OF THE CHANNELED SCABLANDS
THE BASALT PLAIN, NORTH OF THE SCABLANDS AND THE MATURE TOPOGRAPHY
THE MATURE TOPOGRAPHY
DETAILS OF A SCABLAND SURFACE
ALTITUDES AND GRADIENTS OF THE SCABLAND TRACTS
DEPTH OF GLACIAL STREAM EROSION IN THE SCABLANDS
Criteria
Instances
VOLUME OF THE GLACIAL STREAMS
DEPOSITS MADE BY THE GLACIAL STREAMS
DEPTHS OF SNAKE AND COLUMBIA VALLEYS DURING THE EPOCH
THE GLacIATIOn
DEFINITION OF "SCABLAND'
The terms "scabland" and "scabrock" are used in the Pacific
Northwest to describe areas where denudation has removed or
prevented the accumulation of a mantle of soil, and the underlying
rock is exposed or covered largely with its own coarse, angular debris.
The largest areas of scabland are on the Columbia Plateau in Wash-
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


б18
J HARLEN BRETZ
ington, north of Snake River. These scablands have a history
which is believed to be unique. The prevailing feature of their
topography is indicated in the term here used: channeled scablands.*
They are scored by thousands of channels eroded in the underlying
rock. The plateau in Washington, north of Snake River, has a
total area of about 12,750 square miles, of which at least 1,000
square miles is channeled scabland. The scabland is widely dis-
tributed over the region in linear tracts among maturely dissected
hills which bear the loessial soil (wheat lands) of the plateau.
PHYSIOGRAPHIC RELATIONS OF THE CHANNELED SCABLANDS
The following features and relations of the scablands exist in all
tracts. They must form the basis of any interpretation for the
origin of channeled scabland. The map should be examined as this
list is read.
I. Scabland tracts are developed invariably on or in the Colum-
bia basalt formation.
2. Scabland tracts are invariably lower than the immediately
adjacent soil-covered areas.
3. Scabland tracts are invariably elongate.
4. The elongation of scabland tracts is with the dip slope of the
underlying basalt flows. There are eight known exceptions to this
rule, all minor affairs so far as length is concerned.
5. Scabland tracts, considered as units, invariably have con-
tinuous gradients.
6. Scabland tracts are invariably bounded by maturely eroded
topography.
An earlier paper on this subject was published by the writer in the Bulletin of the
Geological Society of America, Vol. XXXIV (1923), pp. 573-608. The study on which it
was based involved about a 1,000-mile traverse of the plateau. Since then, the writer
has studied the plateau more thoroughly, having added more than 2,000 miles to the
previous total traverse. Much more detailed information and several modifications
of the earlier interpretations justify the appearance of a second paper on the subject.
The accompanying map (Plate III) is based on a field examination of every scabland
there indicated. In a few places the boundaries are inferred (dashed lines) but future
work will hardly do more than make minor changes or additions.
A part of Othello Channels, a part of Drumheller Channels, at Palisades and near
Spencer in Moses Coulee, at Soap Lake and near Bacon in Grand Coulee, 6 miles south
of Almira on Wilson Creek, and at Long Lake in Spring Coulee.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY, VOL. XXXI, No. 8
Khovito
saddle Mountaing
Waltake
eras
Scabland areas
Loess.covered and
unmapped areas
Gravel-covered areas
Glaciated areas
Glacial lake areas
Present lakes on the
scablands
Prominent preglacial divides
crossed by glacial drainage
IF SI
THe CHaNneLED ScaBraNds oF THE COLUMBIa PLATEAU A!
The small squares are townships and indicate t
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri. 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


PLATE III
they elder
A
34
A
NATION
ABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU AND THEIR ASSOCIATED FEATURES
all squares are townships and indicate the scale of the map
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri. 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 619
7. Scabland tracts are developed in pre-existing drainage lines
of the mature topography.*
8. Scabland tracts are connected with each other.?
9. (a) The areas surrounded by scabland invariably have the
dendritic drainage pattern, mature topography and loessial soil of
the plateau. (b) They are almost invariably elongate with the
scabland tracts. (c) They commonly have steep marginal slopes
descending from 50 to 200 feet to the scabland. These slopes are
almost invariably in loess. Slopes of 30° to 33° are not uncommon.
They are much younger topographically than the slopes of the val-
leys among these mature hills.
1o. Scabland tracts with steep gradient are narrow, while those
with gentle gradient are wide.
11. The pattern of scabland tracts, where hills of the older
topography are isolated in them, is anastomosing or "braided."
12. Scabland tracts invariably contain "channels." These
are gorges or canyons or elongated basins eroded in the basalt.
'The channels are invariably elongate in parallelism with the tract
as a whole and, in most cases, the channel pattern is anastomosing or
braided.
13. (a) Scabland tracts invariably bear discontinuous deposits
of basaltic stream gravel. (b) These deposits invariahly contain a
small proportion of pebbles and cobbles of rock foreign to the
plateau. (c) These deposits invariably rest on an eroded, scabland
surface of the basalt. (d) They commonly lie on the down-gradient
side of eminences in the scabland.
14. (a) Scabland tracts invariably bear scattered bowlders of
foreign rock. (b) The proportion of foreign debris, either the frag-
ments in the gravel or the scattered bowlers, is invariably smaller
with increasing distance down-gradient.
I5. Scabland tracts are invariably without a mantle of residual
soil.
16. Scabland tracts are traceable up-gradient to a narrow basalt
plain bordering the south side of Spokane River in the northern
There are many exceptions to this rule, occurring where scabland tracts cross
pre-existing divides, but the total length of such is only a small fraction of the aggre-
gate length of all scabland tracts.
2 Moses Coulee is the only exception.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


620
J HARLEN BRETZ
part of the plateau.' This basalt plain bears many glaciated erratic
bowlders and some patches of till. but no channeled scabland, no
mature topography, and no loessial soil.
17. Only where the minor valleys of the mature topography
adiacent to this basalt plain open northward on to the plain are
any glacial erratics found in them.?
18. There are but ten scabland openings to this basalt plain to
the north.
19. Scabland tracts are invariably traceable down-gradient to
Snake River on the south or to Columbia River on the west. There
are nine places where scabland tracts enter these two streams Only
three of them were drainage ways before the scablands were formed.
20. There is no channeled scabland on the plateau in western
Idaho or south of Snake River or west of Columbia River.
21. Nowhere in the scablands or the maturely dissected country,
during ten weeks of field study, has a till been found, or any deposit
of doubtful genesis which could be interpreted more satisfactorily
as till than as non-glacial in origin.3
GENERALIZED STATEMENT OF THE ORIGIN OF THE
CHANNELED SCABLANDS
This unique combination of topographic features of the Colum-
bia Plateau in Washington has only one interpretation consistent
with all the foregoing items. The channeled scablands are the
erosive record of large, high-gradient, glacier-born streams. The
basalt plain records the southern limit reached by the ice sheet
from which these streams took origin. Before this glaciation
occurred, the entire plateau of Washington was covered with a
loessial soil, varying in depth from a few feet to 200 feet. This
and the underlying basalt had been eroded to maturity and a net-
work of drainage lines covered it. The major water courses of this
mature topography were consequent on the warped surface of the
1 Grand Coulee and Moses Coulee are exceptions. Grand Coulee opens up-
gradient into Columbia River Valley and the upper end of Moses Coulee is obliterated
by the drift of a later glaciation.
2 Exceptions due to a later episode in the history of the region are noted later.
3 One exception, noted later.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 621
plateau which descends in a general way from the northeast to the
southwest.
The ice sheet approached and invaded the plateau from its
northern high margin. It barely crossed to the headwaters of the
consequent drainage. In places, it did not cross, but by blocking all
other escapeways, its waters were forced to cross. By about a
dozen different routes, at different altitudes and distributed along
more than Is miles of the ice front, water entered the mature
drainage system. The capacity of the pre-existing valleys was
wholly inadequate for the volume of most of these streams. Fur-
thermore, gradients were high and the glacial waters eroded enor-
mously, sweeping away the overlying loessial material, crossing
low divides and isolating many groups of the maturely eroded
hills to produce the anastomosing pattern of the scablands, biting
deeply into the basalt to make the canyons and rock basins, and
spilling into the Snake and Columbia in three times as many places
as the pre-existing drainage had used.
This procedure of glacial streams was unique, so far as the
writer is aware. It was unorthodox, at any rate, for no valley
trains and but two outwash plains' were built on the plateau
south of the basalt plain. The stream gravel of the scablands is
almost wholly in separate bars.
The conception above outlined is amply sustained by every
feature and relationship of the scablands. All other hypotheses
meet fatal objections. Yet the reader of the following more
detailed descriptions, if now accepting the writer's interpretation,
is likely to pause repeatedly and question that interpretation. The
magnitude of the erosive changes wrought by these glacial streams
is nothing short of amazing. The writer confesses that during ten
weeks' study of the region, each newly examined scabland tract
reawakened a feeling of amazement that such huge streams could
take origin from such small marginal tracts of an ice sheet, or that
such an enormous amount of erosion, despite high gradients,
could have resulted in the very brief time these streams existed.
Not River Warren, nor the Chicago outlet, nor the Mohawk channel,
1 The Hartline gravel flat and the Quincy basin fill, both in structural depressions
in the plateau.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


622
J HARLEN BRETZ
nor even Niagara falls and gorge itself approach the proportions of
some of these scabland tracts and their canyons. From one of
these canyons alone 1o cubic miles of basalt was eroded by its
glacial stream.
THE BASALT PLAIN, NORTH OF THE SCABLANDS AND
MATURE TOPOGRAPHY
This physiographic feature extends westward from Spangle
for 50 miles along the south side of Spokane River and varies from
3 to 12 miles in width. It is determined by the upper surface of
the Columbia basalt formation. It is interrupted in places by
short valleys tributary to Spokane River, and the different portions
are known as prairies.? This plain is bounded on the south by
channeled scabland and maturely eroded loessial hills. The differ-
ences between it and adjacent broader scablands are not marked,
but the loessial hills are in striking contrast with it. These hills
which, elsewhere on the plateau, come right to the edge of Snake
and Columbia valleys,3 nowhere overlook the Spokane Valley.
They terminate abruptly on the southern margin of this plain.
On the plain there is no mature topography and no channeled scab-
land. There is no area on the plateau like it. The nearest approach
to it is the northern portion of Douglas County, back of the Wis-
consin terminal moraine. This narrow plain must be the result of
conditions which prevailed no farther south.
These conditions can be summed up in one word glaciation.
Deposits of till and many striated erratics have been found in every
township examined on it. The till is patchy in distribution. No
moraine margins the southern edge of the plain and no good moraine
ridges occur on it, though here and there is morainic topography.
The genesis of the plain thus established, the questions of its
character before glaciation and the method of its development
arise. These are answered clearly when the adjoining mature
loessial topography is studied. The larger valleys of this topog-
1 Upper Grand Coulee.
Paradise Prairie, Sunset Prairie, Indian Prairie, Four Mound Prairie, etc. On
the north side of Spokane River are Pleasant Prairie and Five Mile Prairie, also parts of
this plain.
3 With the exception of northern Douglas County.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 623
raphy have been eroded to varying depths into the basalt. The
bottoms of such as lead out across the basalt plain to the north are
lower among the hills than the general surface of the plain. The
profile of the plain, extended back among the hills, cuts their slopes
somewhere between hill summits and valley bottoms. And this
transection is at the contact of loess on basalt. The ice sheet which
covered the plain, therefore, simply removed the upper, weaker
formation, and only to a minor extent altered the surface of the
basalt formation.
THE MATURE TOPOGRAPHY
This is the dominant type of topography of the Columbia
Plateau. The major drainage lines are structurally controlled,
but the minor ones constitute a dendritic network. The pattern
is eroded largely in a weak sedimentary deposit, chiefly loessial,
which overlies the basalt. Maturity is expressed in the complete
development of the drainage system, in the reduction of the original
surface to valley slopes' and in the concavity of the lower part
of many of these slopes. This maturity has been developed with
reference to the underlying basalt as a base level, for progress of
the cycle of erosion in the loess has been very much more rapid.
Neglecting the loessial cover, the basalt plateau is in early youth,
and will still be when the loess has been entirely removed. Never-
theless, the absence of deep trenches in basalt in the interior of the
plateau, similar to Spokane, Columbia, and Snake River valleys
about its margin, and the cutting through of the loess has allowed
the development of shallow mature valleys in the upper part of the
basalt.
The loessial deposit varies in thickness, in some places being only
a soil, and in others being 200 feet or more in thickness. It is not
all loess. There are places where it is chiefly a residual soil from the
basalt, and others where it is a waterlaid sediment.? But many
widely distributed sections show a succession of loessial deposits,
A few broad, undissected divides are still left. Michigan Prairie, south of Lind,
is a good example.
3 Probably the Ellensburg formation. The Pleistocene Ringold formation, in
Franklin County, is younger than the mature topography.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


624
J HARLEN BRETZ
with abundant root and rootlet casts throughout and with reddened
upper surfaces of each deposit, aggregating 50 feet or more.!
The mature topography is older than the scablands and the
basalt plain. Literally hundreds of isolated groups of maturely
eroded hills of loess stand in the scablands. Their gentle interior
slopes are identical with those far from the scabland tracts. But
their marginal slopes, descending to the scablands. commonly are
very steep, over large areas amounting to 30° and even 35° (Figs.
I, 2, and 3). These steep slopes are seldom even gullied, except
Fig. 1. One of a group of loessial hills in the scablands a few miles southwest of
Rock Lake. One of the steepened slopes and its alignment are shown. Photo by
O. C. Clifford.
where a drainage line leads out from the bill group to the scabland.
Where the minor valleys transected by the steep slopes lead back-
ward into the interior of a hill group they are simply hanging
valleys.
There are few places where basalt occurs in these steepened
slopes. Where present, it is always restricted to the lower part and
shows itself in conspicuous ledges.
A very striking and significant feature of the steepened slopes is
their convergence at the northern ends of the groups to form great
1 Near Harrington and near Kahlotus are two excellent cuts which show this very
well
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 625
prows, pointing up the scabland's gradient (Figs. 2 and 3). The
nose of a prow may extend as a sharp ridge from the scabland to
the very summit of the hill. It is impossible to study these prow-
Fig. 2.-An isolated loessial hill on the scabland south of Hooper. The prow of
the hill is pointed at the observer. The hill is 18o feet high, more than half a mile
long, has a very narrow crest, and sides which slope 35°. It is entirely surrounded by
scrubbed basalt. Half a mile to the west is a canyon in the scabland 75 feet deep,
with an abandoned waterfall at the head.
FIG. 3.-The same hill as shown in Figure 2. The prow is at the right. The
corresponding steepened slope at the tail of the hill shows at the extreme left. Most
of the apparent left slope of the crest is a matter of perspective. Photo by O. C.
Clifford.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


626
J HARLEN BRETZ
pointed loessial hills, surrounded by the scarred and channeled
basalt scablands, without seeing in them the result of a powerful
eroding agent which attacked them about their bases and most
effectively from the scabland's up-gradient direction.
DETAILS OF A SCABLAND SURFACE
All scablands are channeled to a greater or lesser extent. These
channels are eroded in basalt to depths varying from a few feet to
Fig. 4. Devils Canyon at mid-length, looking south. A double fall existed here
when the canyon was eroded. The island and the eastern part still remain.
hundreds of feet. Commonly there are many shallow channels on
each tract. Most tracts also have a few deeper channels, of the
proportions of canyons' (Figs. 4 and 5). All channels in a tract
are intricately interlaced, resulting in a multitude of butte-
like hills, knobs, and ridges among them. Few channels have
1 Upper Grand Coulee (1,000 feet deep), Lower Moses Coulee (90o feet deep),
Devils Canyon, Franklin County (500 feet deep), and Palouse Canyon (500 feet deep)
are the most noteworthy examples.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 627
accordant grades where they unite or diverge, the bottoms of the
shallower ones hanging above the floors of the deeper ones. Many
canyoned channels have abandoned cataracts and cascades in them
or at their heads.* Most canyoned channels have elongated rock
basins (see Fig. 6. Even in the shallow channels, basins or
pockets in the rock are common. Some of these rock basins
clearly were produced by recession of a cataract whose scarp still
FIG. 5. Devils Canyon near mid-length, looking north. Note the scrubbed
basalt ledges above the canyon rim, and the profile of the loessial bluffs, still higher and
farther back.
exists.? Others were produced by plucking of the columnar basalt
in the canyon floors where the gradient was high.3
These features of the channeled scablands on the Columbia
basalt plateau do not closely resemble any other type of topography.
1 Dry Falls (100 feet high) in Grand Coulee, The Potholes (350 feet high) south
of Trinidad, Frenchman Springs (400 feet high) south of The Potholes, and The Three
Devils (6oo feet total descent) in Moses Coulee are especially noteworthy.
Deep Lake, below one of the Grand Coulee abandoned falls, has many associated
huge potholes, drilled into the basalt at the foot of the falls as they retreated. Each
of the two cataracts of "The Potholes," south of Trinidad, has a single elongated rock
basin at the foot (Fig. 7).
3 Rock Lake in Whitman County, Goose Lake in Grant County, Washtucna Lake
and Eagle Lake in Franklin County, Pacific Lake and Tule Lake in Lincoln County,
Goose Lake in Grant County, Medical Lake, Silver Lake, and Farrington (Fish) Lake
in Spokane County, and Big Swamp Lake and Cow Lake in Adams County are examples
of hundreds of such basins.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


628
J HARLEN BRETZ
The narrowness and elongation of channels and the continuous
gradients of tracts as a whole suggest river valleys but these fea-
tures are all inherited from pre-existing valleys. Furthermore,
some tracts are nearly as broad as they are long. The pattern of
channels on a tract, like the pattern of some tracts and their isolated
loessial hills, is much like that of great braided streams (Fig. 8).
:1000
850
1800
One mile
FiG. 6. -Longitudinal profile of the deepest of the Drumheller Channels across the
nose of the anticline. Four rock basins are indicated, the largest of which is 75 feet
deep.
Columbia River
r1400
-1300
+1200
F1100
+1000
-900
-800
~700
- 600
Опе Mile
FIG. 7.- "The Potholes," longitudinal profile of the northern half, showing (r)
cliff along northern side of the canyon, (2) amount of recession of the falls, (3) elon-
gated rock basin below the falls, (4) great gravel bar along edge of the rock basin, and
(5) approximate level of Columbia River when the cataract was formed.
But the scablands are erosional in origin, while the braided stream
pattern is depositional.
The evidence for the origin of channeled scabland by stream
erosion is overwhelming. The evidence of contemporaneity of
action of all channels of a given tract, at least in its early history,
is equally convincing. The only sequence indicated is that of
development of the greater channels later in the epoch and conse-
quent draining off of the shallower channels.' The scablands of the
plateau in Washington are the beds of huge river courses in which
1 Especially well shown in Lower Grand Coulee, in Moses Coulee between Pali-
sades and Spencer, in The Potholes and Frenchman Springs south of Trinidad, and in
Palouse Canyon south of Hooper, in all of which cataract recession in main channels
cut off smaller channels alongside in the same scabland tract.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 629
the streams once spread completely from side to side and only
later became concentrated in the deeper canyons.
FIg. 8.-A part of Rock Creek (Lincoln County) and its associated scabland.
The creek in the main channel is margined by vegetation. The scabland to the left is
barren and the irregularity in lighting is due almost entirely to the cliffs which
border the shallow anastomosing channels. (Aeroplane Photo by F. H. Frost.)
ALTITUDES AND GRADIENTS OF THE SCABLAND TRACTS
The heads of scabland tracts which are open to the basalt plain
range in altitude between 2,350 and 2,500 feet above tide. There
are six or eight of these, the number depending on just what is
considered to constitute an individual scabland tract. At least
the following should be recognized as unit tracts. The order in the
list is from east to west.
r. Pine Creek channel. Altitude of head, 2,450 feet A.T.
Gradient approximately 25 feet per mile
2. Cheney-Hooper tract
Four heads:
a) Marshall-Spangle, altitude, 2350 *
b) Four Lakes, altitude, ?
c) Medical Lake, altitude, 2,425
d) Deep Creek, altitude, 2,350 *
Total width of the group is 22 miles
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


630
J HARLEN BRETZ
Gradients:
Spangle to Hooper, 21.9 feet per mile
Cheney to Hooper, 22.6 feet per mile
Medical Lake to Sprague, 24 feet per mile
Medical Lake to Hooper, 22.5 feet per mile
3. Reardan channel. Altitude of head, 2,500+
Gradient, Reardan to Odessa, 20 feet per mile
4. Davenport-Harrington channel. Altitude of head, 2,450 *
Gradient:
Davenport to Harrington, 27 feet per mile
Harrington to Odessa, 26 feet per mile
5. Telford tract
a) Eastern head. Altitude, 2,500 *
Gradient:
Rocklyn to Odessa, 30 feet per mile
Rocklyn to Krupp (Marlin), 26 feet per mile
b) Western head. Altitude, 2,500 *
Gradient:
Near Creston to Krupp (Marlin), 32 feet per mile
Near Creston to Wilson Creek, 30 feet per mile
Total width of heads is 17 miles
c) Wilbur branch
Gradient:
Creston to Wilson Creek, 32 feet per mile
Wilbur to Wilson Creek, 25 feet per mile
Almira to Wilson Creek, 26 feet per mile
The only scabland tracts which do not open on the basalt plain
are Grand Coulee and Moses Coulee. For the head of Moses
Coulee there are no altitude measurements. Grand Coulee has had
a peculiar history, not yet fully deciphered, but the significant
altitude at its head for present purposes is not the coulee floor (1,530
feet A.T.) but the scabland margining the brink of the canyon,
about 2,500 feet A.T. The canyon has been cut subsequent to the
first spilling over of glacial waters. The floor near Coulee City is
1,50 feet A.T. Most of this descent occurred within a few miles
of Coulee City, the original slope being as steep as 20° in part and
averaging perhaps 10° for 1,000 feet of descent. This is the chief
reason for the great canyon across the divide. No other scabland
head has been notably canyoned. None other had a gradient to
exceed about 30 feet to the mile. All the canyons of the channeled
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 631
scablands are located in places of exceptionally steep original
gradients.
If the channeled scablands are the product of stream erosion,
and if all tracts are of the same age, the fact that the scabland heads
vary in altitude, though all but two are open to the same glaciated
basalt plain, can have but one satisfactory explanation. Each
glacial stream must have had a source of water which was uncon-
nected with the others. This means that the ice sheet whose melting
yielded these streams must have covered the basalt plain and in
most places must have been in contact with the mature loessial
hills which separate the scabland heads. It means, furthermore,
that but a few miles of ice front supplied the water for streams so
huge that they flooded over many preglacial divides of the mature
topography even in the southern part of the plateau. It was this
flooding across divides which produced the scabland plexus of the
plateau.
About 4 miles of ice front in one case vielded water sufficient
to denude a non-elongated tract 2 so square miles in area of a loessial
cover about 100 feet in maximum thickness. This was done by
lateral planation in the preglacial drainage lines of the tract. These
lines were so shallowly intrenched in the basalt and the volume of
the water was so great that, as the loessial hills were eroded away,
the flood spread over the entire area, 13 miles wide. Gradients
were low, however, and it did not develop canyoned channels.
Steeper gradients farther from the edge of the ice, and greater
capacity of the preglacial valleys, held the waters within the con-
fines of these valleys, but six such? were necessary to contain the
flood and they were all greatly eroded in the underlying basalt.
Another large scabland area? is 75 miles long and Is miles in
average width. Its total descent is 1,850 feet. Its altitude at the
head is the lowest of all such tracts. It differs from the one above in
its notable linear extent, in the possession of a large number of iso-
lated groups of loessial hills of the older topography, in its greater
1 The Telford scabland and its dependencies.
2 Coal Creek, Duck Creek, Lake Creek, an unnamed creek, Connawai Creek and
Wilson Creek.
3 The Cheney-Hooper area, extending from Spangle and Cheney to Snake River,
south of Hooper.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


032
J HARLEN BRETZ
gradient and in the development of canyons.‹ Though a much
greater volume of water passed through this tract, the gradients were
steep enough to draw off the flood and prevent a complete spreading
over the area. Much water came to it from the ice margin to the
east in Idaho and no estimate can now be made of the length of ice
front which contributed to it. There were five or six places of
distributary discharge where this flood crossed preglacial divides and
one of them? eventually obtained most of the discharge. Along this
distributary route, the glacial flood swept away the loessial hills for
a width of to to 15 miles and eroded 500 feet into the basalt.
The glacial drainage route which possessed the highest crossing
of the preglacial surface of the plateau is Grand Coulee. It also
found the steepest gradients and its volume was sufficient with this
gradient to cause the deepest erosion in the basalt. Upper Grand
Coulee, across the preglacial divide, is 1,000 feet deep. But its
floor, after the epoch had closed, was lower than that of any other
glacial drainage route at the head. In its early history it drew
water from about 40 miles of ice front, but never spread widely.
The gradient, determined here by exceptional warping of the
basalt, prevented that. There was no noteworthy preglacial stream
along its course. Grand Coulee is, therefore, the simplest but
grandest case of canyon-cutting by glacial streams on the plateau.
DEPTH OF GLACIAL STREAM EROSION IN THE SCABLANDS
Criteria. The courses of the larger valleys in the mature drain-
age system were determined by the warped surface of the basalt.
The dominant feature of this warping is the southwestward dip
from Spokane River and Columbia River on the north to Snake
River on the south and Columbia River on the west. Many
minor folds are superposed on this dip slope, so recent geologically
that anticlines determine divides and synclines contain stream
valleys.^ Commonly, only the major valleys are intrenched in the
* Cow Creek, Rock Lake, and Creek and lower Palouse River now occupy the most
striking of these canyons.
a Palouse River Canyon below Hooper.
3 In one place, 1,000 feet in about a mile.
4 Examples are Moses Coulee east of Palisades, Wilson Creek above Almira, Crab
Creek below Corfu, Washtucna Coulee, Lind Coulee below Lind, Snake River near
Lewiston and Clarkston, Union Flat Creek, Rebel Flat Creek, and Palouse River
above Winona.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 633
basalt. The minor valleys, in general, are not eroded through the
loessial mantle.
Except near the bounding canyons of Spokane, Columbia, and
Snake Rivers, or in exceptionally upwarped parts of the plateau,
the preglacial valleys in basalt which were unviolated by the glacial
flood, have the same mature slopes as those in the loess. Where
glacial streams found routes eroded but slightly in basalt, they
commonly spread widely at first' and *only later eroded canyons,
if they did so at all. Such wide scablands commonly are bounded
by steep bluffs of loess. Many of the mature valleys in basalt were
sufficiently capacious to contain the glacial waters which entered
them. In such cases? the scabland of the route lies on the sides and
bottoms only, and unsteepened slopes of the bounding older topog-
raphy may come to the edge of the scabland. Such a tract is narrow
and instead of having a multitude of lateral shallow channels anas-
tomosing with the main canyon, it consists of exceedingly roughened
ledges of basalt outcropping on the slopes of the main valley.
Shoulders in the curves of these vallevs were treated with especial
vigor, in some cases being wholly cut away to leave prominent cliffs
on the valley walls.
By smoothing out these ledges, something of the cross-section
of the preglacial valley may be obtained. Remnants of the old
floors are recorded in isolated buttes of basalt on the present floor
and in the lowest prominent rock terraces, below which is the
canyoned channel eroded in mid-current by the huge glacial stream.
Instances. In Cow Creek, southwest of Ralston, the remarkable
number of knobs and buttes in the lower part of the valley indicates
clearly that the preglacial floor must have been at least 75 feet higher
than the present. In Crab Creek Valley, between Krupp (Marlin)
and Stratford, there are prominent buttes, isolated or partially
isolated on the floor of the canyon. The tops of these are remnants
of the preglacial floor and their height (too feet in places) is a
minimal measure of the depth of canyon-cutting by the glacial
waters.
1 As in the Telford and the Cheney-Hooper areas.
Washtucna Coulee, Esquatzel Coulee, Lower Moses Coulee, Lind Coulee, Pine
Creek above Rock Lake, Rock Creek (Lincoln County) and Coal Creek are examples.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


634
J HARLEN BRETZ
In Washtucna Coulee, numerous prominent rock terraces from
150 to 200 feet above the present floor are probably remnants of
the earlier valley bottom. In Esquatzel Coulee, into which Wash-
tuna opens, these terraces are 200 feet and more above the bottom.
FIG. o.-The lower part of Moses Coulee. Part of Malaga, Washington, topo-
graphic map. Note truncated spurs, hanging ravines, alluvial fans, and the great
terrace in both Moses Coulee and Columbia Valley.
In Lower Moses Coulee (Fig. 9), the mouths of preglacial trib-
utary ravines hang approximately 400 feet above the rock floor.
Some of this discordance of grade is due to widening of the pre-
glacial coulee, which here was a canyon, by the glacial stream but
probably most of it is due to deepening during the glacial epoch.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 635
In addition to the deepening of valleys already existing, the
glacial flood actually made, de novo, drainage ways of greater width
and depth than any previously developed on the plateau. This
happened where divides were crossed and unusually high gradients
down the farther slopes were found. Five such places are especially
noteworthy: Devils Canyon, Palouse Canyon below Hooper,
Drumheller Channels, Othello Channels, and Grand Coulee.
Preglacial Palouse River joined Snake River at Pasco, its sub-
parallelism with the larger stream for 150 miles being structurally
determined. The glacial flood from the north entered it in mid-
length at several places between Winona and Washtucna. The
volume of this flood was more than the valley could carry away.
Fig. 10.-Devils Canyon, cross-section a mile and a half south of Kahlotus, show-
ing (r) steepened loessial bluffs (33°), (2) narrow scabland above brink of basalt clifts
(3) canyon 450 feet deep and less than one-fourth mile wide, and (4) post-Spokane
talus, three-fourths the height of the cliffs. Horizontal and vertical scale the same.
Two leaks across the divide to the Snake developed, one near
Kahlotus, and one near Hooper, and in both very great gradients
were encountered.
The Devils Canyon distributary, south of Kahlotus, cut 50
feet or so through the loess and then by recession of waterfalls over
ledges of basalt in the north slope of Snake River Valley, it eroded a
canyon 5 miles long, a quarter of a mile wide and 500 feet deep
(Fig. 10). Every fall but the lowest retreated completely through
the divide. The remaining ledge, like a dam separating the two
canyons, is less than 100 feet above the floor of Washtucna Coulee
and not half a mile wide.' An abandoned half of a double cascade
stands in mid-length of Devils Canyon (Fig. 4).
1 The Spokane, Portland and Seattle Railroad tunnels through this ledge. In
1916, Washtucna Lake was so high for a time that it overflowed through this tunnel
into Devils Canyon.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


636
J HARLEN BRETZ
A much larger volume of water spilled across the preglacial
divide south of Hooper. Before the great canyoned channel now
transecting this divide had been eroded, the stream was ro to 15
miles wide. Several channels of canyon proportion were initiated,
but one outran the others in its deepening and finally secured all
the discharge. Many of the shallower canyons enter the southern
part of the main one over abandoned waterfalls. These channels
could have carried water only when the wide scabland of the divide
had no deep canyon completely across it. Their falls could have
developed only after a deep main canyon existed below their junc-
tion. It follows, therefore, that Palouse Canyon was cut by retreat-
ing waterfalls, though these were destroyed later in the epoch.
One only survived, now notched considerably by the post-glacial
work of the Palouse River. The falls today are 198 feet high.
Palouse Canyon is another Devils Canyon in all save its greater
width and the fact that the preglacial divide was cut entirely in two.
Drumheller Channels and Othello Channels are two remark-
able cases where the glacial flood crossed anticlinal ranges.' In
both, the anticline is asymmetrical and the waters flowed down
the gentle slope. In both, the flood at first was wide but became
concentrated later in the deepening canyons. The maximum depth
of erosion in Drumheller Channels was 400 feet, about 100 feet
of which was in a weak sedimentary formation (probably the
Ellensburg), and 300 feet in basalt (Fig. 11). The width of the
Drumheller denuded tract is about 1o miles. This particular
scabland area has a more striking and more complicated develop-
ment of channels and rock basins than any other on the plateau.
It is the only area of this type now topographically mapped.
Below the Channels, along the northern flank of Saddle Mountains,
the ancient river eroded 300 feet into the broader scabland.
But Drumheller Channels is not wholly the product of the
glacial flood whose history we have been following. It and the
main canyon of Grand Coulee carried drainage from a later ice
sheet, and it has carried Crab Creek since the later glacial epoch.
The amount of deepening during each Pleistocene epoch is diff-
* Drumheller Channels crosses the eastern nose of Frenchman Hills anticline,
Othello Channels crosses the eastern nose of Saddle Mountains anticline.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 637
cult to determine. Othello Channels
carried less water than Drumheller
Channels, consequently is a smaller
tract. Furthermore, it received water
during only the earlier epoch. The
degree of development of its canyons
and rock basins is comparable to that
of the larger tract and makes it prob-
able that most of Drumheller Channels
were formed during the earlier epoch.
The features of Grand Coulee are
of such magnitude and its history so
complicated by local conditions that
an entire paper might well be devoted
to it. It affords the greatest example
of canyon-cutting by glacial streams,
not alone for the Columbia Plateau,
but for the world. The field evidence
indicates that no preglacial drainage
route ever existed here. Scabland
with shallow channels margins the
upper part of the Coulee, though 1,000
feet higher than the adjacent coulee
floor, and there are no tributaries in
the mature topography such as are
possessed by Lower Moses Coulee and
Washtucna Coulee. A glacial river,
3 miles in minimum width, spilled
southward here over the divide and
down a steep monoclinal slope. Judg-
ing by present grades and altitudes
of this structural slope, the stream
descended nearly 1,000 feet on a
grade of approximately 10°, a few
miles north of Coulee City. Such a
situation is unparalleled, even in
this region of huge, suddenly initi-
Grave!
Crab Creek
Channe
mhe
A
Ellens burg (?)
olumbio
Frenchman Hills Antichine
One Mile
§
1500
1300
1200
•1100
900
1800-
FIG. 11.- Cross-section of the head of Drumheller Channels, showing (1) structure at eastern nose of Frenchman Hills anticline,
(2) the pre-scabland topography, and (3) the scabland channels. Probably no preglacial drainage crossed the anticline at this place.
The lower so feet of the deepest channel is a rock basin.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


638
J HARLEN BRETZ
ated, high-gradient rivers. Across this monocline between Columbia
River and Coulee City, the canyon is 30 miles long and averages
all of 2 miles in width and 800 to goo feet in depth. In the
making, at least to cubic miles of basalt were excavated and
removed. Though a later flood of glacial waters used this route,"
it did but little to deepen it.? By far the greater part of the erosion
of Upper Grand Coulee was performed by the earlier glacial stream.
It is very probable that this immense task was performed by the
stoping of cascades and cataracts which retreated entirely through
the monoclinal uplift to the deeper valley of Columbia River and
thus left the great notch.3
It also seems probable that when the retreat of the ice sheet
began, the plateau west of Grand Coulee was abandoned last.
Earlier clearing of the Spokane and Columbia valleys to the east
allowed all the drainage of the ice sheet to use the Grand Coulee
route, which was then the lowest of all. Grand Coulee's greatest
flood and probably its greatest erosion thus came after the other
scabland routes had gone dry.
VOLUME OF THE GLACIAL STREAMS
If the channeled scablands of the Columbia Plateau are the
erosive results of glacial waters, certain statements as to the
volume of the streams can be made. Measurements are possible
if remnants of the preglacial floor of the main valley exist in places
where the valley brimmed over with the glacial flood to produce
distributary courses. Should it appear that the amount of canyon-
* During the Wisconsin glaciation.
Grand Falls, below Coulee City, consists of Dry Falls, Deep Lake Falls and
a smaller unnamed falls a mile east of Deep Lake. The lip of the smaller falls is 125
feet higher than the floor of the channel leading to Dry Falls. Yet all were made by the
same glacial stream and only Dry Falls and Deep Lake Falls were used and modified
by the later discharge.
Furthermore, the Wisconsin ice did not cross Spokane River or Columbia River
east of Grand Coulee and its waters were free to use the lowest of the ten earlier routes.
Only Grand Coulee was so used, showing that it had been eroded by the earlier dis-
charge to a depth not far short of that which it now has.
3 This inference has no physiographic evidence in Grand Coulee to substantiate it,
but is based on the known procedure of the glacial streams in similar situations, e.g.,
Lower Palouse Canyon, Devils Canyon, Frenchman Springs, and The Potholes.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU
639
cutting by these glacial streams has
been overestimated, the depth of the
stream to flood across the divide must
be correspondingly increased. This
view promptly runs into an absurdity,
for the less the canyon-cutting is held
to have been, the deeper and there-
fore more competent to erode the
stream must have been.
One of the best cases for measure-
ment is Washtucna Coulee at the head
of Devils Canyon. Though there are
but two small rock knobs out in the
coulee floor, the summit of neither
indicating the original valley bottom,
there are good rock terraces to record
it Figs. 12 and 13). Near Kahlotus
they lie 1,000 to 1,200 feet above tide.
The glacial stream here, at the begin-
ning of its history, overflowed through
the loessial hills to Snake River, at
an altitude of at least 1,350 feet. It
was, therefore, from Iso to 350 feet
deep. Its width averaged at least a
mile.
And this was no ponded condition,
for Washtucna Coulee opened widely
into Esquatzel Coulee, an even more
capacious valley, and Esquatzel in
turn into Columbia and Snake valleys,
and the glacial waters cut deeply into
the bottom of both coulees. Figuring
the preglacial floor as 1,000 feet A.T.
at Kahlotus and as 675 feet A.T. at
Eltopia, 34 miles farther down the
valley, the great glacial stream had a
gradient of about 1o feet to the mile.
River Valley
Snake
Coulee
One
1500•
113007m
1100%
900
700
500:
FIG. 12.- Cross-section of Washtucna Coulee and Snake River Valley, with longitudinal profile of Devils Canyon, showing
(1) structure of the basalt, (2) its loessial cover, (3) rock terraces flanking Washtucna (Kahlotus) Lake, remnants of the preglacial
valley floor, (4) the inner canyon eroded by the glacial stream, (5) steepened slopes of the loess, facing the coulee, and (6) approximate
upper limit of the food which spilled across to Snake River.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


640
J HARLEN BRETZ
FIG. 13.-Devils Canyon. Part of Connell, Washington,
topographic map.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 641
Further evidence that glacial waters so filled Washtucna
Coulee that the former valley became simply a channel is found in
the upper limit of glacial stream gravels and of scablands. At the
head of Devils Canyon, the highest scabland is 1,250 feet A.T.,
250 feet above the brink of the cliffs of the canyoned channel.
At Estes, a gravel bar deposited by the glacial stream lies 250 feet
above the Coulee floor and about 125 feet above the rock terrace
which marks the old valley floor. Near Sulphur, the highest scab-
land surface, at the base of the steep loessial bluffs, is between 1,100
and 1,150 feet A.T., 10 to 1 50 above the rock terrace. Northwest of
Connell a terrace of sand and fine gravel lies at 1,000 feet A.T. It
marks the upper margin of the scabland here and probably is a deposit
of the glacial stream. It is 100 feet above the broad rock terrace.
The canyoned channel here is cut 15o feet below the rock terrace.
Crab Creek Valley, below Odessa, received more water than it
could carry away, at least before its central canyon had been
eroded. It overflowed southwestward, by way of Black Rock
Coulee and its associated scabland, to the Quincy Basin which
Crab Creek itself entered farther north. Measurements here are
only approximate but they indicate the order of magnitude of this
glacial stream. Scabland and glacial stream gravel along the
southern edge of Crab Creek Valley lie 300 feet or more above the
present stream and extend a mile and a half back on the upland from
the margin of the preglacial valley. This valley had been canyoned
more than 100 feet by the glacial stream which, on the basis of these
figures, was 200 feet deep at its inception.
The Telford scabland tract, 13 miles wide and 20 miles long,
has been swept almost completely bare of the loessial deposit.
The relief in a cross-sertion of the basalt surface now exposed,
aside from the minor canyons, is about 50 feet. To have been so
denuded, this tract must have had a sheet of running water of this
depth completely over it.
: That the ice sheet did not advance over the Telford denuded tract is shown by the
presence of a few isolated loessial hills with characteristically steepened marginal
slopes. One such group lies 7 or 8 miles north of Telford. It has a maturely eroded
topography and a dark loessial soil without rock fragments of any kind. But it is cut
by channels of glacial waters which eroded to the basalt. The fact that these waters
went through the group, though the surface immediately north of them drops off into
the deep canyons of Hawk Creek, a tributary of Spokane River, proves that glacial
ice must have crowded up against the northern side of the group.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


642
J HARLEN BRETZ
Further evidence of the depth of the glacial streams will be
presented under the next subject."
DEPOSITS MADE BY THE GLACIAL STREAMS
The record of Pleistocene glacial streams almost evervwhere is
one of aggradation. Glacialists commonly think of the subject
only in such terms, textbooks discuss it only in that light; it is the
orthodox conception. But in the Columbia Plateau exceptional
factors controlled. 'The preglacial valleys in general were small and
of relatively high gradient, the volume of the glacial streams was
very great, the amount of detritus from the ice was very small, and
the rock crossed was either loess or closely and vertically jointed
basalt, both of which yielded rapidly to the torrents. The result
of these conditions was great deepening of the valleys, and deposits
made by the streams are of minor importance. Their character,
however, adds to the weight of evidence already presented for the
origin of channeled scabland by glacial stream erosion.
The deposits are almost wholly of gravel. Sand is a minor con-
stituent and clayey material is lacking. The gravel and sand are
almost wholly of basalt, though all deposits contain fragments of
rock foreign to the plateau. The basaltic gravel is not well rounded
though most of it is sorted and stratified and indubitably of stream
origin. Foreset bedding is common, the direction of dip according
with the slope of the scabland tract. In some places, the deposits
are composed of very coarse material, with abundant, sub-rounded,
basaltic bowlers 3 and 4 feet in diameter. These were originally
bowlers of decomposition and were derived from flows with par-
ticularly large columns, underlying or in the immediate proximity
of the deposit. Where a few erratic bowlders are associated? the
deposit itself might be misinterpreted as a bowldery till.
The gravel deposits rest on irregularly eroded basalt, essentially
a buried scabland surface. Nowhere do they lie on or beneath
the loess. Neither the gravels nor the underlying basalt are
If these enormous streams all came to the Columbia eventually, should not the
great volume be recorded farther down the master stream? The writer has seen enough
to convince him that it is so recorded, and hopes to publish on this subject in the
future.
As west of Lantz, for example.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 643
decayed. Cementation with calcium carbonate has begun but has
not advanced far.
Most isolated loessial hills in a scabland tract have a deposit
of gravel depending from their down-gradient end. Many knobs
and buttes of basalt have similarly situated gravel deposits.
In many cases, the gravel deposits constitute discontinuous
terraces on the margins of the scabland tracts, suggesting remnants
of former valley fills.? But the evidence seems conclusive that all
gravel deposits of the scablands are bars, built in favorable situations
in the great streams which eroded the channels.
The rounded profiles and ground plans of many gravel deposits
in the scablands are in accord with this interpretation. The
unfilled canyons and rock basins, in intimate association with the
discontinuous gravel deposits, indicate clearly that both are
products of the same episode. The only alternative hypothesis
is that channeled scabland was formed, then buried in gravel,
then in large part re-excavated by streams little short of the magni-
tude of those which eroded the scablands. This has no other field
evidence to support it and requires a much more complicated his-
tory. Furthermore, such deep canyons were cut when the scab-
lands were made, and such noteworthy divide crossings were
made that a reoccupation of all the scablands by glacial drainage
from a second ice sheet would be impossible. And the hypothesis
of dissection by the postglacial streams of the scablands is quite
inadequate. Lakes and pools still stand in the rock basins on the
channel floors, almost as they were left by the glacial flood.
Gravel deposits in the deeply canyoned scablands occur on the
broad upper scabland surfaces, on the roughened slopes of the pré-
glacial valleys and down in the canyons. The interpretation of
these deposits as bars requires no change in general conditions,
as does the alternative hypothesis; it simply requires that gravel
be deposited locally as conditions might favor, all through the
Local exceptions, as 1 mile southwest of Lamont, where ground water has been
especially active.
So the terraces in Pine Creek channel were interpreted in the earlier paper by the
writer. That view is here abandoned for one much more consistent with all other fea-
tures of the scablands.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


644
J HARLEN BRETZ
epoch of erosion of the basalt. Deposits on the highest scablands
were made before the deepening canyons drew the waters into more
restricted routes. Deposits in the deeper portions? were made
during the latest stages of the episode. No gravel deposits were
ever as thick as the rival hypothesis would require them to be.3
That view demands that the canyons be eroded, then filled com-
pletely with their own debris, then re-excavated in large part.
However, there are two places on the plateau where the history
of deposition by glacial streams has been somewhat different.
One of these is Hartline gravel flat, the other is Quincy Basin.
Both are structural depressions, not completely filled before the
glacial floods arrived. The Hartline structural valley became
filled with débris from the cutting of Upper Grand Coulee before
Lower Grand Coulee had been eroded. The trenching of the
lower coulee, and particularly the development and retreat of
Grand Falls, incised the southern rim of the valley so that, by the
close of the episode, the gravel fill, once the floor of the glacial
stream, had been removed in its western part, and the remnant left
200 feet or so higher than the brink of Grand Falls.^ The total fill
in the Hartline structural valley is about 250 feet. It is composed
of bowlers, cobbles, and gravel near Grand Coulee, and of sand
5 or 6 miles east, back from the main drainage line. An old channel
from Grand Coulee crosses its northern and eastern part and leads
into Deadmans Gulch, a distributary which spilled across the south-
ern rim into Spring Coulee before Lower Grand Coulee had devel.
oped into the dominant notch that drained and dissected the flat.
The terrace form of Hartline flat is the result of erosion of a once
complete gravel fill. Its scarp is not constructional, as are those
of bars. But the fill and the subsequent erosion occurred because
of special local conditions, not because general conditions changed.
› As about Gloyd along the Black Rock distributary from Crab Creek Valley.
› As at the mouths of Duck Creek and Wilson Creek in Crab Creek Valley and at
the junction of Crab and Coal creeks.
3 For example, gravel deposits north of the town of Washtucna lie on the slopes of
the coulee, 350 feet above the present floor. They antedate the deeper canyoned
portions of the coulee.
4 Estimated from the surviving eastern member of that complex waterfall, the only
part which escaped modification by the Wisconsin glacial stream.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 645
Quincy Basin, like the Hartline Valley, does not have a scabland
floor. Both lay too low to be eroded. But both belong to the
glacial drainage plexus. Ouncy Basin probably contains more
gravel than all the scablands of the plateau together. It was an
enormous settling basin for the glacial rivers from Grand Coulee
and Crab Creek. The flood of waters entering it was so great that
at first three discharge ways were simultaneously in operation.
The southern and larger one obtained all the discharge later, and
by deep notching of the basin's rim, caused the glacial waters which
traversed the fill to incise their deposits. Two great channels and
one smaller one were thus formed. The two large channels are
each about 3 miles wide. Each was eroded about 100 feet deep
during the later part of the episode. The one which contains
Rocky Ford Creek also carried the later Wisconsin discharge and
was further modified then.?
Erratic bowlers, some of them striated, are widely distributed
at all altitudes on the basalt plain and the scablands. They also
occur in valleys of the mature topography which open northward
on to the basalt plain, and in some which open on to scabland tracts.
The size, angularity, and striated surfaces indicate that these
erratic bowlers were not rolled to their positions by running water.
In the scablands, they must have been carried by berg ice on the
great rivers. In their peculiar and limited distribution in the
valleys in loess is evidence of small glacial lakes, in which the drift-
bearing bergs floated.3
* Frenchman Springs, The Potholes, and Drumheller Channels.
• This interpretation is a modification of that published earlier by the writer.
Further study of Grand Coulee, Quincy Basin, and Drumheller Channels has led to a
magnification of the work of the earlier flood, and a minimizing of the results accom-
plished during the Wisconsin epoch. Grand Falls is now considered to be a pre-
Wisconsin affair, none of the distributary canyons of Grand Coulee, except Dry
Coulee, are thought to have functioned during the second flooding, the Adrian terrace
is considered to be a part of the original fill and not of Wisconsin age, and all the deep
canyons of Drumheller Channels are thought to date back to the earlier episode.
3 Below an altitude of about 1,250, erratic bowlers occur on every formation and
type of topography on the plateau. But these are a younger deposit (see Journal of
Geology, Vol. XXVII (1919), pp. 489-506) and do not much overlap the scablands.
Where overlap does occur, however, it is impossible to distinguish bowlders of the
two categories by any difference in the amount of decay.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


646
J HARLEN BRETZ
DEPTHS OF SNAKE AND COLUMBIA VALLEYS DURING
THE EPOCH
Evidence on this question may be obtained at the debouchure
of glacial drainage routes into these master valleys. Five of the
nine such debouchures will be examined.
The rock floor of Moses Coulee is fully as low as that of Columbia
Valley at the junction of the two. Both contain a great gravel
fill here. Columbia River has cut through it, a depth of more than
300 feet. There is no such trenching in Lower Moses Coulee, but
a well at Appledale penetrates 300 feet of this gravel without en-
countering bedrock.
The two cataracts of The Potholes and Frenchman Springs,
which operated in the early part of the epoch, descended nearly
the full height of the present Columbia Valley walls there. At
The Potholes the glacial cataract can be traced down to less than
200 feet above the present Columbia (Fig. 7).
Koontz Coulee, 20 miles north of Pasco, is cut in the weak Rin-
gold formation. It is 250 feet deep and a mile wide. It is floored
with basaltic stream gravel from the scablands farther upstream.
Though the Ringold silts extend down to the level of the Columbia
at this place, the mouth of the glacial river channel hangs 200 feet
above. No cataract could have been maintained here, as was
done at The Potholes and Frenchman Springs, and the level of the
Columbia of this epoch at this place is thus clearly recorded.
At the mouth of Palouse River, there are two parallel canyons
in the scabland, one containing the river, the other dry. A basaltic
butte separates them. It stands nearly in the center of the valley
and its summit is between 350 and 400 feet above Snake River.
It is a part of the original north wall of Snake River Valley, over
which the gigantic cascade tumbled when the glacial flood broke
across the preglacial divide from the north. This "Goat Island"
testifies to the existence of a Snake River Valley at this place as
deep then as now.
THE GLACIATION
Because the record of the ice sheet, from which came the streams
that made the scablands, is best preserved on the basalt plain about
the city of Spokane and along the south side of Spokane River,
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 647
this has been named the Spokane glaciation.* It assuredly is not an
early phase of the Wisconsin glaciation. That is recorded by pro-
nounced moraines on the plateau west of Grand Coulee, in Columbia
Valley north of the mouth of Spokane River, and in Colville Valley
north of Spokane River. The Spokane ice left no terminal moraine
and very little ground moraine. The reverse relation exists regard-
ing the glacial waters of the two glaciations, for the Spokane glacial
waters were of prodigious quantity and the Wisconsin waters of little
consequence. Furthermore, a long time elapsed between the two
glaciations as shown by the relative volume of talus accumulations
in tracts swept by glacial streams of the two epochs. Post-Spokane
talus in almost all places stands three-fourths to four-fifths of the
total height of the basalt cliffs, post-Wisconsin talus stands about
halfway up on the cliffs of Grand Coulee.?
For the absence of a terminal moraine along the southern
edge of the area reached by the Spokane ice sheet, the writer has as
yet no satisfactory explanation. It seems clear, however, that a
moraine never was deposited, rather than that it was once built
and subsequently removed. The functioning of some scabland
tracts absolutely required glacial ice against the north slopes of the
unglaciated hills at their heads. Floated granite erratics among
some of these hills also require blocking of valleys by glacial ice.
Yet there is no evidence of lateral drainage along the ice front in
contact with the unglaciated hills, to which might be ascribed the
removal of a terminal moraine.
The Spokane glaciation cannot be dated very far back in the
Pleistocene, else the scablands should have a soil mantle of eolian
sand and dust and disintegrated basalt, and the hundreds of lakes
in the old channels should have been destroyed.
Leverett has suggested that a pre-Spokane till beneath loess at
Cheney is of Kansan age. If it is, and if the post-Spokane glacia-
tion is correctly ascribed to the Wisconsin epoch, the Spokane
" J H. Bretz, "Glacial Drainage on the Columbia Plateau," Bulletin of the Geological
Sociely of America, Vol. XXXIV (1923), pp. 573-608.
? This question of differentiating Pleistocene epochs by talus accumulation will be
discussed more fully in a separate paper.
3 Frank Leverett, Bulletin of the Geological Sociely of America, Vol. XXVIII (1917),
p. 143.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


648
J HARLEN BRETZ
glaciation should be either Iowan or Illinoisan in age. Farther than
this, the writer does not care to go.
Ordinary criteria in use east
of the Rocky Mountains for differentiation of drift sheets cannot
safely be used for the correlation of these glaciations in Washington.
The only one relied on here is the moraine-building habit of the
Wisconsin ice sheet, a character which seems to have been world-
wide.I
There were no channeled scablands on the Columbia Plateau
before the Spokane glaciation. A mantle of loess, with a mature
topography, completely covered it. The evidence for this con-
clusion is found in the great and remarkably persistent width of the
Cheney-Hooper scabland tract throughout a length of yo miles, and
the various distributary courses out of it, some of which never were
eroded to the basalt. These features never could have been formed,
had spillways like those of the present existed. But with early
escape southward retarded by the loessial hills and their small
drainage ways, a wide spreading among them necessarily occurred,
and some distributaries were able to cross to Crab Creek drainage.
A puzzling situation regarding glacial drainage exists in the
vicinity of the small Spangle lobe. There is no adequate drainage
route around it for glacial waters which came from Idaho and
western Montana and entered the Cheney-Hooper scabland tract.
Two spillways exist north of Mica, between Lake Spokane? east of
this lobe and Pine Creek channel. Both have erratics in them, the
highest at 2,550 feet A.T., but neither carried much water. There
is no error involved in mapping this lobe because an ice dam at
Spangle is required for the operation of the Pine Creek channel.
This channel carried far more water than the Mica spillways,
water derived directly from the Spangle lobe. Yet it also is inade-
quate for the drainage in question. And much more water went
down the Cheney Hooper scabland tract, in proportion to the
immediately tributary ice edge, than passed through any other
No till or other evidence of pre-Spokane glaciations has been found beneath the
loess (save only the Cheney deposit). No till has been found in the scablands. The
writer is unable to agree with J. T. Pardee who states (Science, Vol. LVI [December 15,
1922), pp. 680-87) that till occurs at "scores" of places on the plateau south of the
limit of Spokane glaciation, as mapped in Plate III.
= Thomas Large, Science, Vol. LVI (September 22, 1922), pp. 335-36.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


CHANNELED SCABLANDS OF THE COLUMBIA PLATEAU 649
scabland tract except Grand Coulee in its later stages. It seems
necessary, therefore, to assume a prominent subglacial drainage
line, across the area covered by the Spangle lobe. This is best
located along the preglacial valley of Lake (Marshall) Creek and the
rock basin of Farrington (Fish) Lake. Out of this rock basin, just
beneath the edge of the ice, the waters from the east emerged and
joined those coming directly from the ice.
If the battle between the diluvialists and the glacialists, out of
which has emerged our conception of Pleistocene continental glacia-
tion, had been staged in the Pacific Northwest instead of the Atlantic
Northeast, it seems likely that the surrender of the idea of a debacle
might have been delayed a decade or so. Fully 3,000 square miles
of the Columbia plateau were swept by the glacial flood, and the
loess and silt cover removed. More than 2,000 square miles of
this area were left as bare, eroded, rock-cut channel floors, now the
scablands, and nearly 1,000 square miles carry gravel deposits
derived from the eroded basalt. It was a debacle which swept the
Columbia Plateau.
Except in the Hartline and Quincy structural depressions.
This content downloaded from 128.193.213.194 on Fri, 16 Jan 2015 14:23:28 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
