VOLUME XXXIII
NUMBER 2
THE
JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY
February-March I925
THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE
CHANNELED SCABLANDS
T HARLEN BRETZ
The University of Chicago
ABSTRACT
The channeled scablands of the Columbia Plateau in Washington are extensive
elongate denuded tracts of basalt, deeply scored by huge high-gradient glacier-born
rivers. As physiographic features they are unique. All the rivers which produced
them converged to Snake and Columbia valleys, and the record of the tremendous
flood thus engendered has been found all the way from the plateau scablands to Port-
land. Columbia River Valley below the confluence of Snake River carried a flood which
at Wallula Gateway was 2 miles wide and reached 750 feet above present river level, at
Arlington was y miles wide and 450 feet above present river level, at Lyle was 3 miles
wide and 430 feet above present river level, and at Portland was nearly 20 miles wide
and 350 feet above present river level
The field evidence for the flood consists of (1) noteworthy, even spectacular, denuda-
tion and erosion of slopes below the upper surface of the flood, (2) spreading of the river
in favorable places back among preglacial hills, 3) deposition of great gravel bars. some
of them nearly as thick as the food was deep, (4) damming of Snake River above the
entrance of the glacial rivers by a delta built upstream against the course of the Snake.
and (5) deposition of the Portland Delta, 350 feet thick, 200 square miles in area, and
with bars 1oo feet high on its surface.
THE PHYSIOGRAPHIC SETTING FOR THE FLOOD
Channeled scabland is limited to that part of the Columbia Pla-
teau which lies between, and above the confluence of, the Snake and
Columbia River canyons (Fig. I). The slope of the plateau in general
is southwestward, away from Columbia River on the north and
toward Snake River and the lower part of the bounding Columbia
97
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


98
J HARIEN BRETZ
on the south and southwest. Almost all the drainage of the plateau
is consequent on this slope.
The Spokane ice sheet crossed the Columbia Valley north of the
plateau and advanced a few miles out on it along almost the entire
northern margin. Water from the melting of this ice flowed in the
preglacial consequent drainage system, entering at or near the heads
of these valleys and traversing their entire lengths. The ablation
of the Spokane ice sheet must have been extraordinarily rapid, for
the volume of water was very great, almost incredibly great, and in
spite of high gradients to draw it off, the pre-existing valleys first
entered were inadequate to carry it all, and the flood spread widely
in a complicated group of anastomosing routes. This pattern is
unique in that all the routes were greatly eroded, many of them being
developed into canyons of notable proportions by the glacial streams,
and some of them crossing prominent preglacial divides on the pla-
teau I The pre-Spokane drainage of the plateau which entered the
Snake was conveyed to one main route, that of Esquatzel Coulee,
near Pasco. During the Spokane epoch, two other discharge ways
were formed, one through Devils Canyon, near Kahlotus, and one
through Palouse Canyon, between Hooper and Perry. The Palouse
Canvon route now carries most of Snake River's share of the plateau
run-off, Devils Canyon carries none, and Esquatzel Coulee carries
but a small portion. This change from preglacial conditions was
due to the profound erosion by glacial waters in Palouse Canyon.
Greater volume and higher gradient at this place determined the
change.
Columbia River had two considerable pre-Spokane tributaries
from the plateau, Moses Coulee and Crab Creek. These proved in-
adequate to carry the Spokane flood, and six others were opened:
"The Potholes," Frenchman Springs, and the Koontz Coulee group
of channels, the first two being simply cataracts over the cliffs of
Columbia Valley. All of these discharge ways leave the west side of
that part of the plateau concerned in this study. None of them now
carry plateau drainage.
1 Set forth in some detail in the writer's paper on "The Channeled Scablands of the
Columbia Plateau," Jour. Geol., Vol. XXXI (1923), pp. 617-49.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Areas of channeled scabland
Areas of scabland gravel
Palouse
Areas of ponded water
50 miles
SNAKE RAPER
FIG. 1.- Sketch map of the region affected by the Spokane flood


I00
J HARLEN BRETZ
The history of the channeled scablands, very briefly outlined
above, has been accepted only with considerable reservation and
qualification by many, for the volume of the flood described and
the results it produced surpass anything previously known in river
phenomena. That this huge volume was a verity, the character of
Snake and Columbia valleys below the entrance of the Spokane
rivers amply proves. This paper describes the remarkable features
produced in these valleys by the concentration of discharge from
the scabland rivers. Though details generally render a paper less
readable, they are presented here to show more clearly the nature
of the field evidence.
THE CHANNELED SCABLANDS
The phenomena which characterize the channeled scabland of
the Columbia Plateau are briefly summarized here. The argument
thus may be clear without a reading, or re-reading, of the writer's
previous papers on the subject.
1. Channeled scabland (Fig. 2) is the eroded surface of the
Columbia basalt formation. It is bare rock or is but thinly covered
with basaltic débris. It is distributed in an intricate interlacing
pattern whose strands are traceable up-gradient to, but not across,
the area glaciated by the Spokane ice sheet, and down-gradient to,
but not across, the Snake and Columbia valleys. This bare, or nearly
bare, rock has a total area of about 2,000 square miles, and its linear
tracts are bounded by thousands of miles of cliffs. Basins excavated
in the solid basalt are common, many of them at the foot of cliffs
transverse to the linear tracts, the sites of former cataracts. Knobs
of basalt standing on the floor of the channels are common also.
2. Stream gravel, 99 per cent basalt, occurs in all scabland
tracts. Except rarely, it does not occur in terraces, nor does it cover
the floors of the channels. It is deposited in great rounded mounds,
commonly on the lee side of basalt knobs and elongated with the
channels. Less commonly, it lies high up on the sides of the scabland
"Glacial Drainage on the Columbia Plateau," Bull. Geol. Soc. Am., Vol. XXXIV
(I923), pp. 573-608; "The Channeled Scablands of the Columbia Plateau," Jour. Geol.,
Vol. XXXI (1923), pp. 6I7-49; "The Dalles Type of River Channel," Jour. Geol.,
Vol. XXXII (I924), pp. 139-49; "The Age of the Spokane Glaciation," Amer. Jour.
Sci., Vol. VIII (1924), pp. 336-42.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FIOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
IOI
channels against the cliffs, though here it generally has the rounded,
elongated forms. These gravel deposits are interpreted as bars made
by the glacial rivers.
3. Above the level of the scablands and their associated gravel
deposits is a deep mantle of loess on the plateau. This loess deposit
has been dissected to maturity and almost everywhere is in gentle
slopes. But along the linear scabland tracts, the loess is steeply
scarped, the slopes averaging 30, all facing and descending to the
scabland. There are many isolated hills of loess entirely surrounded
FIG. 2. Channeled scabland on the Columbia Plateau. The figure in the picture
stands on the brink of an abandoned cataract. Photo by F. L. Pickett.
by scabland (Fig. 3), and these commonly have striking prows which
point up the scabland gradient. Some of these isolated loess hills,
bounded by steep slopes, have the rounded, elongated deposits of
gravel on the down-gradient end. The scarps are interpreted as
river bluffs of the Spokane glacial streams, produced when the
preglacial valleys were not sufficiently deep in basalt to contain the
flood which was poured into them. The anastomosing pattern of
the whole group of associated phenomena is likewise the consequence
of a greater volume than some valleys could carry away, the waters
flooding over many minor and some major divides of the plateau.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


I02
J HARLEN BRETZ
THE SPOKANE FLOOD IN SNAKE RIVER VALLEY
Between Lewiston and Riparia. At Lewiston, Idaho, Snake
River occupies a structural valley in whose northern wall the Colum-
bia basalt flows are tilted 6o° from horizontal. It leaves this open
valley a few miles below the Idaho-Washington boundary line and
traverses a narrow, winding canyon, cut in nearly horizontal flows
of basalt, thence nearly to its junction with Columbia River.
The distance from Lewiston to Riparia is about 100 miles, and
the descent is 200 feet. Terraces of river gravel occur on the inside
of almost every curve in the course. None of these are more than
FIG. 3.-Isolated loessial hills on the scabland of the plateau. Photo by F. L.
Pickett.
50 feet above the river, if talus and alluvial fan deposits on top of
them are not reckoned. Less than 50 per cent of the gravel of which
they are composed has been derived from the Columbia basalt.
Though the canyon walls are steep, there are no great cliffs, and a
mantle of débris and vegetation occurs on most of the slopes. All
of these are normal features, and none suggests the occurrence of
the Spokane flood in this part of Snake River Valley.
Between Ribaria and the mouth of Palouse River. A great terrace
of gravel, 150 to 260 feet above low-water level, lies on the north
side of Snake River Canyon in this stretch. Much of it is flat-topped.
Exposures are numerous along its steep scarp. Almost without ex-
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
I03
ception the gravel is foreset-bedded, and almost without exception
this foreset bedding dips up the Snake River Valley. The amount
of gravel not derived from the Columbia basalt in most sections
does not exceed I per cent. The pebbles are worn, well sorted, and
progressively smaller with increasing distance up the Snake. At the
upstream terminus of the great terrace, a mile west of Riparia (Fig.
4), all the material is fine enough for highway gravel. The summit
here is about 150 feet above the Snake. Though the Snake descends
westward, the terrace top descends eastward.
FIG. 4.- Upstream terminus of the Riparia terrace. Foreset beds dip to the right,
or up the Snake, parallel with the terminal slope.
There is a terrace on the south side of the Snake comparable to
the one described except that its extent along the canyon is much
less. Another gravel deposit on the south side, also opposite the
great terrace, lies in the mouth of the tributary valley of Tucannon
River. Its surface is lower than that of the great terrace and de-
scends southward up the Tucannon Valley to Starbuck, a distance
of 4 miles. Here it meets the bottom of the pre-Spokane Tucannon
Valley, descending toward the Snake. The stratification of the ba-
saltic gravel of this deposit is inclined, and the dip is up the tribu-
tary. The material is progressively finer, also, as the distance from
the Snake is greater. Some of the gravel apparently was carried into
the lower part of Tucannon Valley from the east, across the angle
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


I04
J HARLEN BRETZ
between the Tucannon and the Snake, but most of it came up the
Tucannon."
These three remnants of a great gravel deposit in Snake River
Valley indicate
I) a supply of river gravel introduced some miles below Riparia
and Starbuck, and carried eastward up the Snake and Tucannon
valleys,
2) a depth of ponded water at Riparia of about 250 feet, and
3) the basalt plateau as the source of the gravel.
This deposit was made rapidly, else Snake River would have
filled its valley above Riparia with the coarse débris of its hundreds
of mountain-born, high-gradient tributaries. There is no evidence of
such deposits for at least 10 miles above Riparia. The ponded
Snake, if 250 feet deep at Riparia, was 50 feet deep at Lewiston.
Nothing on the south side of Snake River even suggests that the
gravel of these terraces came from that portion of the plateau. On
the contrary, the features of Tucannon Valley below Starbuck
indicate that the débris came from the northern side, which bears
the scablands.
Between Palouse River and Devils Canvon. -There are many large
gravel deposits in this stretch, all falling into two groups: great
rounded mounds, and flat-topped terraces. The great mounds are
strictly only half-mounds, for they rest against the canyon walls
somewhat like alluvial fans. Almost all of them occur on the inside
of the broad curves of the canyon's course. Almost all of them slope
from their summit contact, at the base of a basalt cliff, down toward
the middle of the valley. These slopes are all convex. Where there
is no notable cliff back of the mound, the gravel deposit has a convex
top and is highest a little out in the valley. One such deposit lies
like a great dam across the mouth of a tributary valley, and a narrow
gash has been cut by that tributary subsequently. These half-
mounds stand 150 to 200 feet above the river-level, and in the
scarps cut by the Snake the gravel descends to river-level. In com-
1 I. C. Russell (U.S. Geol. Survey, Water Supply Paper No. 4. p. 21) noted this
gravel deposit in the Tucannon valley below Starbuck and interpreted it as Snake
River gravel carried back up the tributary valley. He noted also great gravel de-
posits in the Snake Canyon. His interpretation is couched in the conventional terms
of overloading of the main stream by excess supply from the headwaters.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
I05
position, they are go per cent Columbia basalt. Their structure is
largely foreset, with the dip consistently down the canyon. They
bear almost no gullies, ravines, or other erosional slopes except the
steep riverward faces. Some of the mounds show a horizontal
fluting and a minor mounding on their slopes which can only be
original, depositional outlines, as, indeed, the convex slopes are
original slopes.
The deposits of this group are bars. They were deposited during
one short episode when the stream was deeper than they are high,
yet had a mid-current velocity sufficient to keep most of the channel
open from side to side and from top to bottom. The flood in which
they were built came from the surface of the plateau, carried almost
nothing but basaltic débris, and entered the Snake Canyon some-
where above the stretch in which they occur. This flood subsided
so quickly that there was almost no modification of their outlines
by either erosion or deposition from the lowering stream. Hillside
and roadside gullies often show similar phenomena in miniature
after torrential rains.
Only two flat-topped terraces were seen in this part of Snake
Canyon. One is on the south side, opposite the mouth of Devils
Canyon, the other is at Davin Station, on the north side, a few miles
below the mouth of Palouse River. The summits of both are well
above the tops of the mounded bars, the one on the south side 350
feet above the Snake, the one at Davin 200 to 250 feet above. Both
are composed of basaltic gravel from top to bottom and scarcely
touched by gullies.
In brief, then, the features of Snake River Valley for a few miles
both up and down stream from the mouth of Palouse River indicate
the entrance at that place of a great river from the north, far sur-
passing the proportions of either the Palouse or the Snake of today.
The volume of this river actually ponded the Snake for too miles or
so upstream, and into this pond was built a deltaic gravel deposit,
reaching to Starbuck in the tributary Tucannon and nearly to
Riparia in the main valley. And it is here, at the mouth of Palouse
River, that the greatest contribution from the Spokane flood across
the plateau scabland entered Snake River. The evidence for this
has been presented in a previous paper and will not be reviewed
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


106
J HARLEN BRETZ
here. The glacial river at its inception was to or 15 miles wide, and
in its central portion it eroded at least 500 feet deep just above its
junction with the Snake. The Davin terrace lies at the debouchure of
a distributary course of this river, and the plateau scabland extends
almost to the brink of the Snake Canyon here. In a similar fashion
the great terrace below Riparia can be traced northward to the
scabland along the eastern margin of the wide glacial river.
Mouth of Devils Canyon. Devils Canyon was eroded by overflow
from Washtucna Coulee across a preglacial divide to Snake River
Canyon during the Spokane epoch. As shown by the scarped loes-
sial hills margining this glacial river course, the flood rose to 1,300
feet A. T. in Washtucna Coulee, at which altitude part of it spilled
over to the deeper valley, and the large torrential stream thus
formed rapidly eroded Devils Canyon. Before the close of the epi-
sode, the canyon was gashed 500 feet deep in basalt, all but cutting
the divide down to the floor of Washtucna Coulee. The spill-over
apparently entered a short preglacial tributary of Snake River,
for the mouth of Devils Canyon is flaring, unlike the extreme narrow-
ness of the rest of it. In the middle of this flaring mouth is a basalt
knob, of no remarkable proportions, but characteristically a scab-
land knob, and flanked by post-Spokane talus. It is clearly an ero-
sional remnant of the pre-Spokane floor of the tributary. Below this
knob, and projecting in part out into the Snake Valley beyond the
line of the canyon walls, is a gravel deposit about 16 feet above the
level of Snake River. The surface of this deposit bears an exceptional
ridge, shaped in ground plan like a horseshoe, with the concavity
facing up Devils Canyon and the two ends abutting against the
walls of the flaring mouth. The middle of this semicircular ridge
is about 6o feet above the rest of the gravel deposit. It is sym-
metrically lower on both limbs, the lowest places being next to the
rock walls. The slopes of the ridge are gentler toward the concavity,
i.e., upstream, than they are toward Snake River. Post-Spokane
run-off has cut a narrow ravine through the ridge at its contact with
the eastern rock wall,' but when the glacial river ceased to flow,
1 The topographer who sketched this ridge was quite at sea as to its origin. The
Connell sheet shows it as a minor ridge projecting from the west wall of Devils Canyon
and due to stream erosion.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
I07
this semicircular ridge was complete and inclosed a basin in the
mouth of Devils Canyon. In this basin stood the eroded basalt
knob above noted.
Closer scrutiny of the ridge shows that it is fluted radially, or
composed of low radially elongated mounds, largely coalesced, and
that on its downstream face, out in Snake River Valley, are traces
of larger, older flutings on which the semicircular ridge has been
built.
This curious gravel ridge is a bar. It is identical with the bars
formed across torrential streams where there is a slackening of
velocity because of increased width of channel and decreased gradi-
ent. It is duplicated in roadside gutters after heavy rains. It is evi-
dence conclusive that a great torrent made Devils Canyon, that that
torrent abruptly ceased to flow, and that the surface of Snake River
at that time was more than 220 feet above its present summer
level. The fact that the gravel deposit extends down almost to the
river-level shows that Snake Canyon was then eroded approximately
to present depth and the stream at that time was more than 220.
feet deep.
The materials of the gravel deposit are not well shown. In
the exposures available, the gravel is poorly sorted and little worn.
It is practically all basalt. The large amount of interstitial silt in
the gravel suggests its derivation from the destruction of loessial
hills on the scablands farther north.
Snake River Junction. In many ways the vicinity of Snake
River Junction' exhibits the remarkable changes caused by the
Spokane flood better than any other place in the canyon. An ob-
server standing on the hilltop centrally located in Section 11, T. 1o
N., R. 33 E. (Fig. 5), 2½ miles southeast of the junction, can see for
miles both up and down the valley. The canyon proper, with very
steep, rugged, bare cliffs and ledges, lies below a broad higher valley
floor that is several times as wide as the top of the canyon. Above
this broad floor rise the gently rolling loessial hills of the plateau,
but almost without exception their slopes toward the broad floor
are about 30.°
' Junction of Spokane, Portland and Seattle Railroad and Lewiston branch of
Northern Pacific Railroad.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


108
J HARLEN BRETZ
The severely eroded bare basalt below the higher broad floor,
typical scabland in its character, carries great isolated gravel depos-
its with rounded summits and convex slopes. The higher floor is
1,000 feet A.T. in maximum elevation at Snake River Junction,
where it is determined by the upper surface of the Columbia basalt
formation, from which the loess has been removed by the wide
SODOOR
FIG. 5.-Vicinity of Snake River Junction, showing the loess-covered plateau, the
extent of the upper floor of scabland basalt from which the loess has been removed, its
steep margining slopes of loess, isolated hills of loess, and the abandoned portions of
Snake River Canyon. From the Wallula, Washington, topographic map, U.S. Geo-
logical Survey.
glacial river, and on which gravel has been spread. The absence of
such a floor from Riparia down to the vicinity of Snake River Junc-
tion is due to the failure of the flood to reach the upper limit of the
basalt cliffs.
In the extreme northwest corner of Section I1, above noted, is
an isolated loess hill, with slopes of 30°, with elongation parallel to
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
I09
the Snake Canyon and with a prow pointing up the canyon (Fig. 6).
Between it and the hill, centrally located in this section, is a flat-
bottomed valley, walled by loess bluffs and floored by Columbia
basalt at about 1,025 feet A.T. Here a small part of the glacial flood
spread across a minor divide of the invaded loessial drainage system,
to re-enter the main flood about a mile farther down. This isolated
hill is typical of hundreds in the plateau scabland.
But at the cornering of sections I, 2, II, and 12 is another small
preglacial valley in loess, similarly oriented and proportioned and
with similar altitude of floor, but with the divide at the head intact.
The divide is composed of loess and lies a little above 1,100. We
FIG. 6.-Isolated hill of loess, 2} miles southeast of Snake River Junction
conclude, therefore, that the glacial flood which swept the loess
from Section 1 and made the steep cliff in loess along its southern
margin failed to rise to 1,100 feet A.T.
East of Simmons Station is a greatly eroded hill of nearly bare
basalt (Sec. 35, T. II N., R. 33 E.), its summit a little below 1,100,
with Snake River on the northwest side and a valley in basalt on
the east fully as broad as the Snake Canvon but 250 feet less in
depth. On the downstream end of the hill is a bar of basaltic gravel
250 feet thick. The broad streamless valley east of the hill is a part
of the pre-Spokane course of Snake River, the stream having located
and eroded a more direct route during the flood which so greatly
denuded the basalt hill. This abandoned portion contains remnants
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


IIO
J HARLEN BRETZ
of a stained and indurated river gravel, of which not more than 25
per cent was derived from the underlying formation.
A great bar along the Spokane, Portland and Seattle Railroad,
2⅝ miles northeast of Snake River Junction, is 400 feet thick. The
gravel pit excavated by the railroad here has a scarp 200 feet high.
The gravel is unindurated and slides easily, so that the structure is
difficult to decipher. But it is 99 per cent basalt.
One more feature in the vicinity of Snake River Junction may be
described and the list then closed, though every mile of the canyon
here contributes to the history of the Spokane flood. The locality is
between Page Station of the Spokane, Portland and Seattle Railroad
and Tunnel No. 8 on the Oregon-Washington Railroad, and involves
4 square miles, most of it east of the river. The canyon here is
narrower than at any other place in the plateau. East of the narrow
place is a basalt hill 400 feet above river-level, possessing the typical
severely scrubbed scabland aspect. The hill is separated from the
rest of the higher land to the east by an abandoned valley which is
open to the Snake at Tunnel No. 8 and opposite Page. Its floor is
nearly 150 feet above the present river. Depending from the down-
stream end of the bare rock hill and overlying it in part is a gravel
bar about 200 feet thick, whose convex outlines are unmistakable.
The growth of the bar has constricted the southern part of the aban-
doned valley. The present course of the Snake through the excep-
tionally narrow canyon west of the hill departs from the fairly sym-
metrical meandering pattern. it elsewhere possesses in the vicinity
of Snake River Junction. Were the narrow canyon filled, the bar
removed, and the Snake replaced in the old course east of the scab-
land hill, the symmetry would be restored, all steeper bluffs would
stand on the outside of curves with the river undercutting them.
and a uniform width of valley would exist throughout. It seems
probable that the Spokane flood, which at its inception was at least
250 feet deep over the top of this hill, cut across a pre-Spokane spur
in the valley's course and eroded the narrow canyon west of the hill.
If this be correct, then Snake River Canyon was deepened here
about 15o feet by the glacial stream.
In summary, the vicinity of Snake River Junction records a
river of dimensions so great that the pre-Spokane valley was but a
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
III
channel for it. The glacial waters, in prodigious volume, reached
at least 1,000 feet A.T., though the surface of the river today is but
400 feet A.T. here. About 150 feet of deepening in basalt occurred,
all exposed rock slopes were greatly eroded to typical scabland
forms, two new routes were cut across the pre-existing curves, huge
amounts of basaltic gravel were eroded and transported. All the
features of the plateau scabland are here. Bluffs of loess 250 feet
high and with 3o° slopes face the broad scabland floor, isolated prow-
pointed hills of loess stand on the margins of the broad floor, bars of
basaltic gravel with the typical convex slopes so often seen in the
plateau scablands lie in protected places below the level of the broad
floor, and cliffs without streams at their bases have talus standing
three-fourths of the height of the original cliffs. The glacial river
was at least 400 feet deep and 3 miles wide here at its inception.
THE SPOKANE FLOOD IN COLUMBIA VALLEY ABOVE
THE MOUTH OF SNAKE RIVER
Columbia Valley between the limits reached by the Spokane ice
sheet and the mouth of Snake River has not been studied as carefully
as it deserves. But enough is known to warrant the statement that
nothing comparable to the Spokane features of Snake River Canyon
is found in it. No great bars are known, no bluffs of loess, no reloca-
tions of the stream course, almost no scablands. Yet the flood was
there and left its record.
Columbia Valley is deeper and considerably wider than Snake
Canyon, and carried its share of the Spokane flood without rising
to the summit of the basalt cliffs. Hence the absence of the steep-
ened slopes in loess and of scabland above and margining the river
valley. Much of the water entering it passed through settling-basins
which trapped the waste of the scablands. Much came directly
from the margin of the ice sheet. The basaltic gravel which did
enter appears to have been mingled with older gravel, and the
striking dominance of basalt, seen in Snake River bars, is absent
here. Evidence of the height reached by the flood has been found
largely in the features of the scabland spillways from the plateau.
Moses Coulee.-The largest single spillway was Moses Coulee,
a pre-Spokane drainage way which was greatly modified during the
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


II2
J HARLEN BRETZ
Spokane epoch. In Columbia Valley at its mouth, and extending
back up the coulee, is a gravel deposit more than 300 feet thick,
the highest part of which is 925 feet A.T. and the lowest surface
about 80o. Since the coulee carried some discharge from the Wis-
consin ice sheet, subsequent to the Spokane glaciation, this lower
surface, which floors most of the mouth of the coulee, may not date
from the earlier epoch. But the higher part certainly does. And
below the mouth of Moses Coulee the high gravel terrace lies against
the foot of an exceptionally high steep cliff of basalt. The cliff
strikingly truncates a number of short tributaries to the Columbia
and their separating spurs. It constitutes the east side of Columbia
Valley and of Moses Coulee, and thus is traceable into the scablands.
Only a great stream undercutting at about 1,000 feet A.T. could
make this cliff, and the character of its talus dates it as Spokane
in age.
"The Potholes."-Ten miles south of the mouth of Moses Coulee
is "The Potholes," a huge alcove caused by retreat of a scabland
cataract. Not considering the remarkable holes, which are more than
I25 feet deep in bedrock, the cataract made a sheer leap of 200
feet from the brink of the Columbia cliffs to the surface of a promi-
nent rock terrace of the Columbia Valley, itself about 400 feet above
the river. Over the edge of this terrace the stream spread in several
channels and leaped again, this time about 125 feet. Much less
work was done by the cataract on the edge of the terrace than on
the summit of the cliffs, and for this notable difference a reason
must be found. The terrace extends northward from "The Potholes"
along Columbia Valley for several miles, rising upstream about 80
feet to the mile with the gentle tilt of the basalt flow which holds it
up. For 2 miles north of the ancient cataract, the surface of the
terrace is greatly channeled in typical scabland fashion, with "holes"
and rock islands in complex profusion." East of this scabland on the
terrace top is the upper cliff with three-fourths talus.
Farther north, however, the terrace surface bears no scabland,
and the cliff has soil-covered talus to the very summit. The Spokane
flood, therefore, entered on this southward-sloping rock terrace at an
›Some of these are shown on the Quincy sheet, but most of them are too small
to be caught by any contour.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
II3
altitude of about 1,200 feet A.T., scored its surface, and undercut
the cliff above it. The three-fourths talus of this cliff indicates that
all the wastage has accumulated since the scablands were formed.
But 1,200 is the altitude of the brink of the upper Potholes cataract.
No cataract existed, then, at the beginning of the spill-over. Its
development waited until the main Columbia Valley flood subsided,
though the scabland flood was still running at full volume. The
explanation for this seems to be that some constriction farther down
the Columbia Valley held up the great flood at first, but was rapidly
eroded during the episode. The surface of the stream therefore fell
until, late in the cataract's history, the rock terrace was exposed
and the lower falls took origin. Such a constriction exists, and is
described in this paper.
Gable Butte and Gable Mountain -Near the towns of Hanford
and White Bluffs, 35 miles above the junction of Snake and Colum-
bia rivers, the Columbia Valley is I5 miles wide. Most of the valley
floor here lies about 500 feet A.T., though the river surface is below
375. This 5oo-foot floor consists of a great gravel deposit which
extends southward to and beyond the mouth of Snake River. This
broad part of the Columbia Valley is largely structural, the basalt
dipping below the bottom of the river channel. But near Hanford
two large hills of basalt stand in the gravel plain (Fig. 4). They are
parts of the north limb of an anticline which pitches eastward be-
neath the valley from the high basalt hills to the west. Gable Butte
rises 763 feet A.T., or about 250 feet above the plain. Gable Moun-
tain has two summits, one of them 1,075 feet A.T., the other I,I16,
and the plain surrounding the mountain is as low as 425 feet A.T.
Both hills have been greatly scoured and carry the scabland type
of knobs and channels. The channels cut across the summits and
vary in depth from 50 feet to 150 feet. Trenching the surface of
the gravel plain about the base of the hills are much larger channels.
They flank the hills in such a fashion that it is clear that the waters
which scoured the hills developed the margining channels. The
surface of the Spokane flood, therefore, rose above I, 100 feet in this
wide valley."
Olaf Jenkins, in Bull. 26, Div. Geology, Dept. Conservation and Development, State
of Washington, notes that the channels in the plain record a great glacial stream in the
valley.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


II
J HARLEN BRETZ
carrarilla
-COLUMBIAF
GRANT. CO
FIG. %.-Gable Butte, Gable Mountain, and associated channels in the flanking gravel deposits. From the Coyote Rapids,
Washington, topographic map, U.S. Geological Survey.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
II5
That the gravel plain flooring the wide valley is a deposit of
this stream is not clear. Its surface is greatly obscured by sand
dunes, and of its expression before they grew, only the large chan-
nels remain. Its materials include a large percentage of non-basaltic
material. Its altitude is far below the surface of the flood. Yet
it may be a gravel floor built where the wide valley invited deposition
at the bottom of the great stream. If not, it is older than Spokane,
rather than younger, as its trenching shows.
Othello Channels distributaries.-At the east end of Saddle
Mountain, near Othello, part of the scabland flood on the plateau
spilled southward over a pre-Spokane divide and took several dis-
tributary courses thence to both Snake Valley and Columbia Valley.
At least four channels seem to have carried glacial water to the
Columbia, the northernmost entering in the latitude of White Bluffs
and the southernmost mouthing at Ringold. Two of these open on
the brink of the Columbia bluffs at 200 and 300 feet above the river,
and two open back from the brink at altitudes of about 400 feet
above the river, or 750 feet A.T. All of these altitudes are much
below the upper limit of the flood as indicated by the rock terrace
just north of "The Potholes" (1,200 ft. A.T.) and the summit of
Gable Mountain (1,116 ft. A.T.). All are eroded in the weak Ringold
silt and clay, which here constitutes the east bluff of the Columbia.
The relations of these channels and Gable Mountain seem to
indicate the same situation as at "The Potholes": an initial great
depth of water in Columbia Valley, and the lowering of that water-
level while the scablands were being eroded. The differences in
altitude of the channel mouths seem to indicate abandonment
of some during the lowering of the Columbia and continued deepen-
ing of the remaining ones until the close of the episode. The gravel
deposit at the mouth of Moses Coulee likewise records a late stage
in the episode.
It is now in order to seek for the cause of the rapid lowering of
the flooded Columbia during the Spokane epoch.
1 Only the southern two were mapped in "The Channeled Scablands of the Colum-
bia Plateau.
[To be continued]
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.210 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 19:44:25 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE
CHANNELED SCABLANDS. II
J HARLEN BRETZ
The University of Chicago
THE SPOKANE FLOOD IN COLUMBIA VALLEY BELOW
THE MOUTH OF SNAKE RIVER
Wallula Gateway. Concentration of all the Spokane discharge
into one valley occurred at Wallula, where Columbia River in an
antecedent course crosses a prominent upwarp of the basalt plateau,
a few miles below the mouth of Snake River (Figs. 8 and 9). The
canyon here has very steep walls for 750 feet above the river, and
its minimum width at the top of these cliffs is a mile. This is Wallula
Gateway, probably the narrowest place in Columbia Valley south
of the Canadian line. Whatever its depth at the inception of the
Spokane flood, the canyon was inadequate to contain the great
stream. The glacial Columbia rose above the summit of the cliffs
and spread westward a mile and eastward an average of more than
half a mile.
The top of the western wall, for a mile back from the brink of
the Gateway cliffs, is scored and channeled by a plexus of anasto-
mosing ravines and gulches in basalt, which trend with the river
course. Their gradients descend southward. At their heads they
open toward the broad, low structural valley north of the uplifted
tract. Southward, they lead to the brink of the broader part of the
canyon below the Gateway. Erosive action has been great, for the
basalt is bitten 100 to 150 feet deep in these channels. Rock basins
excavated in their bottoms record great volume of water moving
with considerable velocity.
And the water which traversed them did not come from higher
land to the west; it came from the broad, low structural valley to
the north. It entered at an altitude of 1,050 feet A.T., hundreds
of feet above the bottom of that valley. The streams left the south-
236
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


Areas of ponded water
John Day River
Areas of scabiand gravel
обрчлат
Areas of channeled scabland
50 miles.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
FIG. 8.-Sketch map of Columbia Valley between Wallula and Portland, showing area affected by the Spokane Flood


238
J HARLEN BRETZ
ern ends of these channels at altitudes of about 950 feet A.T. They
did not flow down the slope to any lower level. Since they ceased to
erode below an altitude of about goo, they must have entered a
body of water in the broader canyon below the Gateway whose sur-
face was not much above 950.
This is scabland on top of the western cliff of the Gateway.
It is wholly unlike the topography of the higher slopes. To
be typical, it needs only the bounding bluffs of loess, bar and
terrace gravel, and three-fourths talus on its basalt cliffs. The
steep bluffs of loess are
absent, because the
higher land here is all
basalt. The gravel de-
posits are not shown, but
may be present in certain
rounded hillocks and
shoulders. Most of the
talus is higher than
three-quarters, though
some is typical. The ba-
salt at this horizon
breaks readily into small
FIG. 9.-Wallula Gateway, showing the scabland pieces and perhaps may
type of topography within and above the canyon have disintegrated more
walls. From the Wallula, Washington, topographic rapidly than the average
map, U.S. Geological Survey.
rate.
The east side of the Gateway has scabland up to the same level,
and gentle, soil-covered slopes above. "The Sentinels" (Figs. 1o and
I) and their associated bare rock hills and channels are clearly
scabland forms. And all the divides between the pre-Spokane
tributary ravines which drain the higher land to the east are severely
scored and notched below 1,050, so that they are separate hills
instead of ridges.
Here, then, the entire Spokane flood was finally converged to
make the prodigious river which filled and overflowed WallulaGate-
way. Here, also, was the constriction which first held up the surface
of Snake and Columbia rivers, and whose enlargement allowed the
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
239
fall in their levels while the scabland rivers were running at full
volume. How much widening was accomplished is not clear, but
the deepening probably extended from the base of the Sentinel group
of scabland buttes, 500 feet A.T., to the rock ledges in the river
today at about 300 feet A.T. The increase in capacity was very
rapidly produced and the backwater above the Gateway lowered
early in the Spokane epoch.
FIG. 10.-The east wall of Wallula Gateway. Scabland cliffs extend about ~00 feet
above the Columbia. Above them, the basalt is covered with loess, and all slopes are
gentle. A prominent scabland channel, shown in Figure 7, lies back among the cliffs
and is not shown in this view. "The Sentinels" stand a little to the right of the center of
the picture.
Estimating from the scabland above the cliffs west of the Gate-
way, the glacial river surface descended 50 feet or more in 3 miles.
But near Snake River Junction, 25 miles upstream, the highest
river-level was no greater than at the entrance to the Gateway. The
cause of this is the broad structural depression in the basalt. The
flood waters spread over several townships immediately north of
the narrow Gateway. And in this region was deposited all gravel
which had traveled with the flood through Snake River Canyon and
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


240
J HARLEN BRETZ
Columbia Valley.* Therefore, gravel left by the Spokane flood in
Columbia Valley below Wallula Gateway must have been derived
from erosion of rock ledges and cliffs also below the Gateway. In
distribution and topographic expression, these deposits are unlike
those in Snake River Canyon, as will appear in the following descrip-
tions.?
FIG. 11.-"The Sentinels," scabland buttes in the Wallula Gateway. Talus and
cliffs together are 100 feet high. Copyright G. M. Weister.
Vicinity of Umatilla. Columbia Valley has much lower walls
about to miles below Wallula Gateway. At Cold Springs Station, on
the south side, the bluffs are not 250 feet above the river, and for to
miles south of the Columbia here (vicinity of Stanfield [Foster] and
Hermiston), the country does not rise 500 feet above the river.
* These deposits are now masked by eolian sand and not easily identified.
3 The significance of the Wallula Gateway constriction was not realized when the
plateau scablands were studied. The early ponding of the flood north of the Gateway
must have affected the lower part of the plateau as well as the Snake and Columbia
valleys. Examination of altitudes shows that lower Crab Creek Valley and Washtucna
Coulee must have contained backwater from the Gateway, and that this was very prob-
ably responsible for the high water-levels which initiated Othello Channels and Devils
Canyon divide crossings, and probably was a factor favoring the Drumheller Channels
and Palouse Canyon crossings.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
24I
This region south of the river is largely covered with basaltic gravel
deposits, disposed in broad, low hills and separated by equally
broad ramifying channels which lead out of the Columbia and back
again a few miles farther downstream (Fig. 12). Basalt buttes ap-
pear here and there in this area of gentle slopes. Umatilla Butte and
uS BUTE В 22
'matte MASHINGTO
FIG. 12.- Umatilla lowland, showing braided course of the Spokane Columbia
across the gravel-covered flat, and the situation of Emigrant, Hermiston, Umatilla, and
Sillusi buttes. From the Umatilla, Oregon-Washington topographic map, U.S. Geo-
logical Survey.
Hermiston Butte are the most prominent ones. They, as well as the
basalt bluffs of the river, are severely eroded bare rock scabland
forms, and their association with the channels and gravel deposits
indicates a common origin.
Both of the buttes named are due primarily to sharp local up.
warp of the basalt along a north-south line. Sillusi Butte, just north
of the Columbia and also on this line of deformation, is similarly
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


242
J HARLEN BRETZ
eroded on its riverward face, though wind-driven sand masks its
character in part. Emigrant Buttes, 10 miles south of the Columbia,
is another sharp pucker on this line, but possesses gentle slopes and a
complete cover of soil. The contrast between the uneroded Emigrant
Buttes and the craggy Hermiston and Umatilla buttes is very in-
structive. The only explanation applicable is that Hermiston and
Umatilla buttes, respectively 620 and 675 feet A.T., were overrun
by the Spokane flood, while Emigrant Buttes, 759 feet A.T., stood
beyond and above the limits of the flood and were spared. It there-
fore appears that in the Umatilla lowland this flood rose nearly but
not quite to 50 feet A.T. Elsewhere in the region the roo-foot con-
tour approximately marks the upper limit of scabland and basaltic
gravel.' A descent of about 250 feet in the surface of the Spokane
Columbia therefore occurred at the beginning of the episode in
about 15 miles of distance. Most of this probably occurred in the
Gateway and the gorge immediately below. Certainly the walls
of the canyon here bear witness to very vigorous scour for several
hundred feet above the river level. The talus on the great cliffs
southeast of the river below the Gateway stands two-thirds to three-
fourths the height of these cliffs. This is a good Spokane ratio; con-
sidering that post-Spokane river work probably has carried away
some of the talus. The Sentinels and associated scabland knobs in
the Gateway bear three-fourths talus, and therefore have not been
touched by waters of the Columbia since the flood subsided. Their
bases are about 200 feet above the river.
Vicinity of Carley. There are two anticlinal folds in the basalt
on the north side of Columbia River near Carley Station, both
parallel to the river and both clearly expressed in the topography.
Tributary streams, antecedent to the folding, have cut them into
several short ridges or buttes, and, subsequent to this, the Columbia
has risen high enough to flow around them all. Artesian Coulee is
the most prominent erosional feature here, due largely to the flood.
Its floor is so low, however, that it cannot be cited as a channel
abandoned ever since the Spokane epoch. Crow Butte, anticlinal in
* Not all of the gravel in this lowland is of Spokane age. At Echo, Stanfield (Fos-
ter), and elsewhere are outcrops of a stained, indurated gravel with a considerable pro-
portion of non-basaltic material. It is much older than the scabland gravel.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
243
structure, has the scabland erosional features, though much ob-
scured by wind-blown sand. Golgotha Butte is an isolated part of
the other fold and was also surrounded. On its north side, away
from the river and about з miles distant, is a large gravel deposit,
650 feet A.T. and 400 feet above the river. The material is unweath-
ered and largely basaltic, but from the presence of quartzite pebbles
there seems to have been incorporation of older gravel in it during
the Spokane flood.
When the river was high enough to deposit this gravel, it must
have spread over miles of the low country south of the river here
and west of the Umatilla region. Much basaltic gravel is exposed
along the railroad south of the river, but its altitude is not more than
150 feet above the river and its significance therefore slight. The
low country is heavily mantled with wind-blown sand, and little is
known about the material beneath. The most prominent feature
is a broad flat which rises gradually westward from Umatilla River
to an altitude of 650 feet and descends abruptly from this summit
flat toward the west. See Fig. 12. It probably is a Spokane bar, but
if so it contains a large amount of reworked material derived from
the older gravel deposit below the scabland waste. There are no
elevations of basalt in this low country.
Vicinity of Arlington. The surface of the basalt rises west of
Carley, and the Columbia is encanyoned thence to The Dalles,
where another structural depression is entered. At Arlington, on the
south side of the river and about 50 miles below Umatilla, the wall
of the canyon is 850 feet above the river. On the north side here it
is 1,200 feet above. The Spokane flood was confined within these
walls. But there was a lower surface of the basalt, southeast of
Arlington and about 6 miles south of the Columbia, constituting the
broad divide between Willow Creek and Alkali Canyon, both north-
ward-flowing tributaries to the Columbia. Overflow from the Co-
lumbia Valley backed up Willow Creek Canyon and crossed this low
place to Alkali Canyon. The divide here is about 5 miles wide and
nearly flat-topped (Fig. 13). On it are two distinct channels, the
floors of which are about roo feet A.T. They have much bare rock
in irregular low buttes and crags, exactly like those in the scablands
and along the Columbia in many places at low water. There are
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


244
J HARLEN BRETZ
numerous gravel deposits of no great magnitude on these channel
floors, and a well-formed delta front with 30° slope and fine foreset
bedding at the same angle extends out into Alkali Canyon at their
mouths. The delta front is about 2⅓ miles wide, and the brink varies
from 650 to 700 feet A.T.
Between Arlington and The Dalles. Evidence for the presence of
the Spokane flood is well distributed along the Columbia Valley in
RIVE
FIG. 13. Vicinity of Arlington, showing the scabland channels between Willow
Creek and Alkali Canyon and the delta front in Alkali Canyon. From the Arlington,
Oregon-Washington topographic map, U.S. Geological Survey.
the so miles between these two towns, though there are no lowlands
for records such as those at Umatilla, Carley, and Arlington. Large
gravel deposits are commonly present in the mouths of tributaries
whose walls at junction with the Columbia were lower than the upper
surface of the flood. Salients in the Columbia's walls are strikingly
cliffed, and many have secondary channels in basalt back of them
where the flooded main spread. Since the character of such features
is already familiar to the reader, only a list is given here, as the
simplest method of indicating the weight of the evidence.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FIOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
245
Jones Canyon, south side of Columbia, I mile west of Arlington. Large
gravel bar with beautiful aggradational slopes descends into canyon mouth
from rock shoulder on the east. Rim rock of the cliffs both east and west of the
canyon mouth is scrubbed.
Lang Canyon, south side of Columbia, 4 miles west of Arlington. Large
gravel bar in mouth, depending from the eastern or up-Columbia shoulder.
Scabland topography on summit of rock terrace just east of bar. Upper limit of
scabland 650 feet A.T.
Chapman Creek, north side of Columbia, 5 miles west of Roosevelt. Gravel
terrace of basaltic débris in mouth. Summit about 600.
Blalock Canyon, south side of Columbia, 8 miles west of Arlington. No
gravel deposit in mouth. Eastern wall at mouth is 950 A.T., too high for the
flood to cross.
Rock Creek Valley, north side of Columbia, 13 miles west of Roosevelt.
Gravel terrace on west side of mouth. Altitude about 650. Basaltic material.
Unnamed canyon, south side of Columbia, ½ mile below Rock Creek Rapids.
Pronounced gravel bar in mouth.
Goodnoe Station, north side of Columbia. A well-formed gravel bar lying
against the Columbia bluffs a little west of station. Not a dependent bar. Has
aggradational slopes on both upstream and downstream ends.
Columbia Mountain, north side of Columbia, about o miles east of Mary-
hill Station. Lower ledges of basalt are much scrubbed and carry the "dalles,"
or flat-topped, steep-sided knobs and low buttes. Except along face of Columbia
Mountain, the talus here is three-fourths. Eroded face of the mountain is com-
posed of nearly vertical basalt flows, much brecciated, which crumble much
more rapidly than the average. Talus covers the whole face of the great cliff.
Rufus Station, south side of Columbia. Good gravel bars depend down the
Columbia Valley from salients here. 'Two tributary gulches, each with bars or
remnants of a complete blocking in their mouths.
John Day Canyon, south side of Columbia. No gravel bar in mouth. East
wall at unction with Columbia was too high.
Maryhill Station, north side of Columbia. A side-hill bar, not dependent
from a salient, extends from 500 to 6oo feet A.T. on the slope above the station.
Face of basalt cliff between Maryhill and Fallbridge is rugose like scabland.
Buttes of same character on south side of river near summit of bluffs. Also a
sidehill gravel bar whose bedding dips parallel to the down-valley surface slope
of the bar.
Biggs Station, south side of Columbia. Large gravel bar, like a great shoul-
der, partially fills mouth of canyon here. It depends from the west, or down-
stream, spur and points up the Columbia. An unusual but not unknown type of
bar, due to an eddy in the great stream in a re-entrant of the valley walls to the
lee of a prominent salient.
Des Chutes Canyon, south side of Columbia. No bar here. East wall of
tributary canyon too high for flood to cross. Scabland forms along much of the
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


246
J HARLEN BRETZ
south wall of Columbia Valley between mouths of John Day and Des Chutes
rivers.
Fallbridge Station, north side of Columbia. In vicinity of this station are
striking basalt knobs, high, narrow, and steepsided, above the railroad level but
at foot of the high bluffs. A great, butte-like island, castellated and channeled,
stands here in mid-river. It is genuine scabland, identical with hundreds of
such features on the plateau, except that a river still swirls past its base and its
talus ratio is therefore low. Prominent rock terrace 10 feet or so above railroad
bears scabland for some distance from Fallbridge downstream.
The Dalles. -This city is built in the middle of a structurally
determined broad valley in the basalt. Two sedimentary formations
here overlie the basalt, one older than the deformation and one
younger. The lower one is a river deposit commonly known as "The
Dalles Beds," and in all probability is a phase of the Satsop forma-
ation. The upper deposit, largely of volcanic débris, has never been
described.
Into this structural depression the Columbia enters from the
east through a series of cascades and races known as "The Dalles
of the Columbia." There is no place in the Pacific Northwest today
which more closely reproduces the Pleistocene scabland rivers of
the plateau than do these "dalles." The river races almost all the
way across the depression and, on leaving it, enters the famous
Gorge of the Columbia across the Cascade Range.
A large part of the low area on the north side of the river is swept
clean of the sedimentary formations above the basalt and is a barren
waste of black rock knobs and buttes, rock basins, gravel bars, and
active dunes. So far as its character is concerned, it might have been
transposed bodily from the plateau scablands. Its altitude above the
Columbia is not great, however, and it has been easy to assume that
the obviously stream-eroded rock flat, to square miles or more in
area, was an abandoned portion of the valley floor, left in the ordi-
nary course of valley-deepening by the present stream. However,
the Columbia of the present is a puny stream with which to sweep
this flat. Almost all of it must be covered by a stream at one time,
for the tract has but little relief. Furthermore, the breaking down
of the knobs and basin walls during normal valley-deepening would
1 "The Dalles Type of River Channel," J Harlen Bretz, Jour. Geol., Vol. XXXII
(1924), pp. 139-49.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
247
have obliterated the higher of these features, while those nearer
present river-level would be relatively fresh, and this contrast does
not exist. The open channels and holes in basalt, associated with
gravel bars in the lee of knobs, indicate a volume adequate to cover
the flat when they were formed.
It is significant that the weakly consolidated sedimentary depos-
its above the basalt have steep slopes facing this scabland at The
Dalles. Though they are not as distinctive as the same features in
the plateau loess, the occurrence of two or three circumdenuded hills
of sediment on the upper margin of the scrubbed basalt strongly
suggests the same origin. There seems to be no definite marker in
the topography here for the upper limit of the flood.
Lyle. There is probably no better-displayed bar of the Spokane
flood below Wallula Gateway than the one which lies just north of
the town of Lyle, Washington. Its outlines are clearly expressed, its
location and relations to the shape of the valley are ideal, its struc-
ture is unequivocal, its composition is exactly what is demanded,
and its altitude above the present river is adequate.
Lyle is in the Columbia Gorge, ten miles below The Dalles. Co-
lumbia River crosses an upwarp of 3,000 feet in the basalt' between
these towns and enters at Lyle a synclinal area? in which its gorge
has much lower walls. The Spokane flood rose above these walls
and overflowed a part of the structural valley's floor. Slackened
current resulted in places along the margins of the broadened river,
and deposition was the consequence. The Lyle bar was one product
(Fig. 14). Its summit is about co feet above the Columbia (precise
altitude not known), its materials descend on the slope to about 50
feet above the river, its slopes are convex, it has no river cliff and
almost no gullies, its structure in excavations is foreset with the
dip up the Columbia, and its situation is in the lee of a prominent
cliff of basalt. It rests against the hillside back of it, but its eastern
and upstream end is a rounded ridge not in contact with the hill.
Probably its débris has come in large part from the face of the cliff
immediately upstream.
It cannot be interpreted as a terrace remnant of a once continu-
ous valley fill. The case is so clear that the writer, years before he
: The Ortley anticline.
2 The Mosier syncline.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


248
J HARLEN BRETZ
knew of the existence and significance of plateau scabland, was con-
vinced from the character and setting of this deposit that it was a
shore bar built in an eddy in an immensely swollen river whose
bottom then was not much higher than that at present.
Another deposit of the Spokane Columbia is well shown a mile
west of Lyle on the Evergreen Highway. Pits along the highway
show a gravel deposit whose bedding dips away from the Columbia
and up a small tributary valley. The upper limit of the exposures is
390 feet above Lyle, 490 feet A.T., and it extends down the slope
for 200 feet. Not one pebble in a thousand is of non-basaltic mate-
rial. In the gravel are large angular fragments of basalt that have
FIG. 14.-Lyle bar in lee (to the left) of cliffed salient. Foreset bedding dips toward
the cliff, or up the Columbia. Photo by C. S. Reeves.
been riven off near-by cliffs, up over which the fine gravel was carried
from the open Columbia. The summit of the deposit constitutes a
dissected terrace 530 feet A.T., and is traceable back into a channel
which re-entered the Columbia about a mile farther downstream at
an altitude not much less than 530. The channel is cut in the Satsop
formation, itself a gravel deposit, but there is no possibility of con-
fusing the two gravels, for the Satsop is much dissected, is tilted with
the basalt, is somewhat indurated, has no foreset bedding, is capped
by a lava flow, contains a lava flow, and also contains strata of vol-
canic ash and pebbles of quartzite and granite.
Scrubbed basalt slopes and cliffs are prominent features on both
sides of the river about Lyle. On the Washington side above Lyle
the slope of the valley is soil-covered from the summit (about 2,000
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
249
A.T.) down to an altitude of about 6oo feet, but below this, though
the slope is about the same, are exceedingly rough, bare rock sur-
faces.
Water from the Spokane Columbia crossed a low place in the
spur between the main gorge and the canyon of Mosier Creek on the
Oregon side, west of Lyle, and carried basaltic gravel over into the
tributary canyon. The deposit lies on the east side of the canyon. Its
material is fine subangular gravel, like that at and near Lyle, and
it has foreset bedding which dips away from the Columbia and this
notch and into Mosier Creek Valley. Its altitude is about 450 feet
A.T., more than 350 feet above the surface of the Columbia.
Vicinity of Hood River, Oregon. The Columbia crosses another
anticline west of Mosier' and enters another synclinal valley at Hood
River and White Salmon. On the south side of the deep gorge in
this upfold are castellated crags and ridges paralleling the river,
with linear channels in basalt separating them from the main hill-
side. The Columbia River Highway traverses some of these chan-
nels whose floors are at least 400 feet above tide. The crags are
as severely eroded on the side toward the hill as they are on the river
side, and talus about three-fourths the height of the cliffs flanks them
in the abandoned high channels. They are as clear a record of erosion
by the Spokane Columbia as anything in the Gorge.
Grading in the serpentine curves of Columbia River Highway on
the east side of Hood River Valley has exposed a great deal of fresh
subangular basaltic gravel up to 300 feet A.T. It lies just where
a deposit should lie if the crags and channels were eroded by a
greatly swollen stream.
In the southwest part of the city of Hood River is a gravel ter-
race 5o0 feet A.T. In it is a large pit at about 450. The deposit is
like that elsewhere associated with the scabland flood in the Colum-
bia Valley, except that it has a flat top and its structure consists of
the ordinary current type of foreset laminae in horizontal strata. No
long delta foreset structure was seen. Up to the same altitude for
3 miles or so west of Hood River are many large rolled bowlders of
the underlying Herman Creek lava. Above this level, the orchard
land is soil-covered, unterraced and unbroken by outcrops of rock,
1 The Bingen anticline.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


250
J HARLEN BRETZ
and without any bowlders. If it were not for features at White
Salmon, shortly to be described, this would be taken for the upper
limit of the flood.
At Columbia Gorge Hotel, west of Hood River a few miles and
on the brink of the 200-foot cliffs of the Columbia, is a typical scab-
land expression of knobs and channels in the Herman Creek lava,
and, in addition, a feature nowhere found in the Columbia basalt
scabland-potholes! The worn surfaces are undeniably of this
genesis, though their outlines record the onward sweep of river-borne
débris, rather than the drilling in minor eddies or in cascades.
White Salmon, Washington. The highest and largest deposit
made in the Columbia Gorge during the Spokane flood underlies
this town, directly across from Hood River. It is a great eddy bar,
situated almost exactly as is the Lyle bar. Its material contains
go to 95 per cent of Columbia basalt débris. The texture is fine
enough for highway surfacing, though here and there are angular
fragments of basalt a foot or so in diameter. Foreset delta bedding
or foreset laminae in horizontal or gently inclined strata show in
every cut. And, without exception, all of the many exposures show
a dip up the Columbia or back into the tributary valley here or some
component of the two. The summit altitude is the astonishing
figure of 670 feet A.T.
The great bar depends up the Columbia Valley from White
Salmon Butte. Its summit is highest at the base of the butte and is
progressively lower, and its width progressively less, toward the
east. It is 330 feet A.T. at the eastern terminus. It lies on a rock
surface which slopes in the same direction, so that its thickness is
nowhere the difference between the upper and lower limits.
The bar seems to be compound, a lower and longer bar lying on
the riverward face of an older, higher bar. The summit of the lower
is 6oo feet A.T. Its eastern terminus originally blocked the tributary
valley here. In the ravine subsequently cut through this tip, the
foreset bedding is very well shown (Fig. 15). It is of the delta type
and dips toward the back side of the bar, not along its length. The
back slope (the slope away from the Columbia) parallels this bed-
ding. The top and the front slope truncate it. Depth of the exposure
is about 40 feet.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
25I
Cooks, Washington. A gravel deposit along the Evergreen High-
way east of this town has a terrace-like top 3ro feet A.T. It lies
on the west side of the mouth of the tributary Little White Salmon
Valley. The north wall of the Columbia Valley here for 6 miles
upstream is composed almost entirely of the Underwood lava, much
younger than the Columbia basalt. 8o to go per cent of the material
in the gravel deposit is of Columbia basalt, with Underwood lava
ranking next in abundance.
FIG. 15. -White Salmon bar. Section in back slope near lower terminus, showing
the foreset bedding, which dips away from the Columbia
Foreset beds dip toward, and downstream along, the Columbia
cliffs here. Large irregular blocks of Columbia basalt and large
rolled pebbles of Underwood lava occur in the gravel, which other-
wise is fine enough to put directly on the automobile highway. The
riverward slope truncates the foreset bedding and carries the large
pebbles of Underwood lava. Unless the deposit originally extended
completely across the mouth of the Little White Salmon from the
cliffs of Underwood lava, these pebbles must have been rolled up
the slope something like 200 feet to come to their present position.
The whole deposit lies on, and to the downstream side of, scabland
knobs of Columbia basalt.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


252
J HARLEN BRETZ
Mouth of Wind River, Washington. Along the Evergreen High-
way west of the bridge across this river is an excellent exposure of
coarse sand and very fine gravel, 150 feet thick, which belongs to
this category of deposits of the Spokane flood. It is much cross-
bedded and has considerable long foreset bedding which dips away
from the Columbia and up Wind River Canyon. The upper limit is
400 feet or more A.T. East of the mouth of Wind River perhaps a
mile is another exposure of this material at 350 feet A.T. The upper
limit here is 440 feet above the sea.
THE PORTLAND DELTA
Though the foregoing description of the effects of the Spokane
flood in Columbia Valley below Wallula is not complete, it includes
the more significant features now known. If it be granted that the
observer has had an adequate training and that his field study has
been sufficiently extensive and discriminating, it must be admitted
that the existence of a great flood in the Columbia, transcending
any known similar phenomenon, has been established. But the
story is not complete until this vast river has been traced to its
debouchure. To a consideration of this we now turn.
The debouchure of the Spokane Columbia was in the Williamette
structural valley, between the Cascade and Coast ranges. Here it
entered an estuary of the Pacific whose surface stood more than 350
feet above present sea-level. Here it built the Portland Delta, of
which 1 5o square miles still remain. More than 50 square miles have
been removed by the Columbia and Willamette rivers since it was
deposited. The delta apparently never grew more than 8 or 1o miles
beyond Vancouver.
The Portland Delta is a subaqueous deposit, an affair of river-
bottom deposition, and was not a delta plain when constructed.
The river was too feet deep over much of the surface when it was
built. The evidence for this conclusion is developed in the following
description.
The gravel of the delta is predominantly of basalt. It is un-
weathered except at the very surface, where there is some discolor-
ation, and is easily distinguishable from the Satsop gravel, also wide-
ly exposed in this valley. Its structure is shown in hundreds of ex-
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
253
posures throughout a vertical range of 350 feet. In almost every one,
the gravel is delta foreset. The dip is dominantly southwestward in
the southwestern part of the area covered, westward in the central
part, and northwestward in the northwestern part.
The surface of the delta lies largely in two levels, about 200 and
about 300 feet A.T. In some places the slope between the two levels
is gentle, but in most places it is steep. The 30o-foot level occurs
in isolated portions. Some of these lie against higher land along the
northern and southern sides of the delta, some occur in the lee of
eminences of older rock which rose above the surface of the flood,
and some constitute narrow ridges on the 200-foot level elongated
with the direction of stream flow when the delta was made. Except-
ing only in the immediate vicinity of Columbia and Williamette
rivers, the original surface of the great gravel deposit has been
altered by erosion only to an insignificant degree. The land forms
on it are constructional.
An earlier interpretation of the Portland Delta considered the
200-foot level as the result of dissection of an originally continuous
300-foot plain. This view becomes untenable when the ridges on
the 200-foot level are carefully studied. Most of these ridges are
grouped in the vicinity of Hidden Station, 4 miles northeast of Van-
couver. They are long, narrow, and straight. The most striking one
is 1½ miles in length and about 300 feet wide on top. They stand
from 50 to 100 feet above the swales which separate them. Those
which appear wide on the map (Fig. I6) are closely placed parallel
groups, partially coalesced. They are composed of foreset-bedded
sand and very fine gravel, 95 per cent basalt. The foreset bedding,
so far as shown, dips down the northern slopes in parallelism with
those slopes, and is truncated by the tops and the southern slopes.
The swales among these ridges contain lakelets and swamps elon-
gated with the ridges. There are no streams in them, and no ravines
lead from them to the nearby Columbia. The ridges have an orien-
tation approximately radial to the curved edge of the delta. This
I "The Late Pleistocene Submergence in the Columbia Valley of Oregon and
Washington," J H. Bretz, Jour. Geol., Vol. XXVII (I919), pp. 502-3. In this paper the
age of the delta was considered as Wisconsin. Since the paper was written, the scabland
history has been deciphered, and the delta is seen to be a product of the Spokane flood,
not the Wisconsin submergence.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


254
J HARLEN BRETZ
gives them a northwestward divergence. The northernmost are
composed only of sand. In form they closely resemble eskers, but
they lie 75 miles south of the limit reached by the continental ice,
and their field relations clearly prove them to be parts of the delta.
These ridges are held to be river bars, standing about Ioo feet
above the main channel floors. A stream of at least that depth thus
must have spread over the 20o-foot level of the delta while it was
FiG. 16.- Part of the Portland Delta, showing portions of the 200-foot and 300-foot
levels and the group of narrow linear bars about Hidden Station. From the Portland,
Oregon-Washington topographic map, U.S. Geological Survey.
being built. Admittedly, this interpretation would be difficult to
establish without other evidence for the depth of the river. Another
feature of the delta, however, throws light on the question. It is
Rocky Butte and the delta surface in its proximity.
Rocky Butte. -Rocky Butte (Fig. 17), in the northeast part of
Portland, is a hill of basalt nearly surrounded by the Portland Delta.
Its lower slopes are cliffed on the east and north, and from its north-
ern base the land descends to the flood plain of the Columbia. The
delta surface east of the butte is 300 feet A.T., but between it and
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
255
the cliffed face of the butte is a fosse whose floor is not far from I25
feet A.T. At the bottom is a closed depression more than I mile long,
less than ⅕ mile wide, and averaging 2 to 25 feet deep. At the north
the fosse opens toward the Columbia. At the south it widens and
divides into two long arms, one extending west and one southwest.
MULINOS CO
Lemmon
WASHINGTON
OREGON
" I BASE
LINE
FIG. 17.-Part of the Portland Delta, showing Rocky Butte and environs. From
the Portland, Oregon-Washington topographic map, U.S. Geological Survey.
Its floor gradually rises also, the trench-like character disappears,
and it blends into the delta surface at about 225 feet A.T.
Abutting against the rock hill on the west is a terrace exceeding
250 feet in altitude. This terrace is much elongated and extends
westward for about o miles, its summit descending below 150 feet
in this distance. On the south, the terrace is bounded by a steep
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


256
J HARLEN BRETZ
slope which, for Is miles west of the butte, has an elongated depres-
sion at the base.
What is the explanation of these features at Rocky Butte? It is
easy to say that Columbia River produced them, and probably no
one would object to this assignment of responsibility. But the situ-
ation demands something more than the river at a higher level. The
water that flowed southward through the fosse at the east foot of
Rocky Butte had to rise from below 125 feet to above 225 feet. It
therefore was more than too feet deep in the fosse. Even then, it is
difficult to conceive of the narrow fosse as erosional in origin.
But if we postulate a flood of proportions sufficient to cover the
entire surface of the delta, the whole situation becomes clear. The
fosse is but the unfilled locus of an eddy caused by downward deflec-
tion where the current impinged on the east face of the butte. The
lower cliffed portion of the butte is the product of the same eddy.
The 30-foot terrace east of the fosse never was, never could have
been, extended to reach Rocky Butte. The dependent terrace to the
west was deposited in the slack water below the obstruction. All
parts and all levels of the delta here were formed at the same time.
The velocity of the water alone determined the height to which the
subaqueous parts of the deposit grew. Exactly similar situations
are seen in all streams with traction loads and mid-current obstruc-
tions of sufficient magnitude.
The highest known portion of the delta is a broad eddy bar in the
lee of the southern shoulder at the mouth of the Gorge. It lies be-
tween Troutdale and Gresham, and its highest part reaches 363
feet A.T. All of it is above 325. Exposed in its eastern part is the
familiar dark basalt gravel, foreset-bedded with dip up the Colum-
bia, as all lateral eddy bars should have. Some of the foreset beds
at the east end of the bar dip northward, recording the return cur-
rent of the eddy, moving back into the main flood. West of this
bar is a broad channel floor about too feet lower, and still farther
west is the 30o-foot portion which lies east of Rocky Butte. The
butte stands 8 miles out on the delta from the mouth of the Gorge.
The eddy bar south of Troutdale is so miles down the Columbia
from White Salmon. The difference in altitude between the Spokane
gravel deposits at these two places is 300 feet. The valley in this
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
257
distance has no noteworthy constrictions to which this difference in
altitude could be ascribed, as in the case of Wallula Gateway. The
river never had any such surface gradient as 6o feet to the mile in
a broad, open valley. Further, the White Salmon bar is higher than
any known deposits of the flood for too miles upstream. If these
bars and the delta are contemporaneous, the superior altitude of the
White Salmon deposit apparently must be attributed to post-
Spokane differential uplift in the vicinity of that town. But bars
and subaqueous delta forms do not record the surface of the water
in which they were deposited. It is difficult, if not impossible, to
ascertain definitely the upper limit of the flood below the loess-
covered plateau. Because of this difficulty and because of the ab-
sence of direct field evidence for differential movement, the writer
hesitates to build such items into his explanation of the Spokane
flood.
THE VOLUME OF THE FLOOD
If the volume of the Spokane flood can be measured anywhere,
it can be measured at Wallula Gateway. Certain assumptions must
be made, however, as to the capacity of that notch at the inception
of the flood. The platform on which "The Sentinels" stand appears
to be a remnant of the pre-Spokane floor at about 500 feet A.T.
Spring Gulch is a hanging tributary valley which enters the Colum-
bia just below the Gateway. The abrupt steepening of gradient in
it occurs at close to the same altitude. The position of "The Senti-
nels" indicates that the pre-Spokane width of the notch did not
exceed § mile.
The waters rose to about 1,025 feet A.T. in mid-length of the
Gateway, and had a surface gradient through the Gateway of about
15 feet to the mile. A cross-sectional area of the flood at its incep-
tion, to include that which spread back on the summits of the cliffs,
amounts to approximately 3,485,000 square feet. The surface of the
flood descended to 475 feet A.T. at the mouth of Juniper Canyon,
about 81 miles below mid-length of the Gateway, and its cross-
sectional area there appears to have been about 2,006,000 square
feet.
These figures have been used by Mr. D. F. Higgins, of the Univer-
sity of Chicago, as a basis for computing the volume of the initial
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


258
J HARLEN BRETZ
flood before any noteworthy deepening or widening had lowered its
surface. Mr. Higgins used Chezy's formula =cV rs, in which o is
velocity, r the hydraulic radius (area of section divided by wetted
perimeter of same), s the slope of the surface (expressed as tangent
of angle of slope), and c is a constant. The value of c depends on the
character of the channel, and was chosen to indicate a maximum of
impedance from irregularities of sides and from eddies and cross-
currents generated by turns in the course of the valley. This formula
was devised for and is applied to small-capacity drainage lines, such
as sewers, ditches, etc., and its use here involves the assumption,
which cannot be true, that conditions in this enormous river were
similar. However, it is the nearest approach to any formula which
can be used. The actual volume probably was greater than the
computed one secured by its use.
On the basis of surface slopes, the velocities indicated are 20.6
feet per second for the current in the Gateway itself and 30.4 feet
per second for the current just below Juniper Canyon. On the basis
of cross-sectional areas, the velocities appear as 17.5 feet per second
in the Gateway and 35.7 feet per second at Juniper Canyon. Using
mean velocities and computing for discharge (area X velocity), the
enormous quantity of 66,132,000 second-feet, or 38.9 cubic miles per
day, is secured. As above noted, this figure is probably below the ac-
tual amount. As it stands, it represents the melting of about 42
cubic miles of ice daily. The maximum measured flood of the Colum-
bia at The Dalles, 100 miles downstream, is 1,170,000 second-feet.
The Spokane flood thus was much more than so times the volume
of present-day floods in the Columbia.
Another quantity of importance in interpreting the Spokane
flood is the area of ice which, by surface ablation, could yield this
prodigious quantity of water. Using the average maximum summer
solar radiation of Lincoln, Nebraska, and Madison, Wisconsin
(about 500 calories per square centimeter), Mr. Higgins finds that
a maximum depth of summer melting by direct isolation today
would be 2.66 inches. At this rate of melting, approximately 1,000,-
ooo square miles of ice would be required to yield the water for the
Spokane flood. But if the drainage of the Cordilleran ice sheet was
controlled by the existing major divides and river valleys, not
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms


THE SPOKANE FLOOD BEYOND THE SCABLANDS
259
100,000 square miles could have contributed to the discharge which
crossed the Columbia Plateau. Obviously, the rate of melting must
have been far greater than any direct insolation could have produced.
Computations such as these strongly incline one to doubt the
actual occurrence of the flood. The writer has repeatedly been
driven to this position of doubt, only to be forced by reconsideration
of the field evidence to use again the conception of enormous vol-
ume. It is the only adequate explanation of the phenomena. These
remarkable records of running water on the Columbia Plateau and
in the valleys of Snake and Columbia rivers cannot be interpreted in
terms of ordinary river action and ordinary valley development.
The factors of declivity, of valley shapes, of rock, and of time cannot
be adjusted to explain them. Enormous volume, existing for a very
short time, alone will account for their existence. The field evidence
all the way from Spokane to Portland, a distance of 300 miles, knits
together in a consistent whole to support this explanation. Though
there are a few features of the record whose origin is not yet under-
stood, none are known which weaken the hypothesis.
FINAL STATEMENT
That the Spokane flood occurred is clear. That it was short-lived
and waned very promptly after diversion around the northern mar-
gin of the plateau seems probable. The exceptional conditions
which caused it are still obscure. All phases of glacial behavior con-
sidered, the writer at present can conceive of only two possible
explanations for this flood. One is a very rapid and short-lived
climatic amelioration in which warm winds and warm rains pro-
duced great surface ablation of a much-fissured ice sheet before the
front of the ice retreated from the northern margin of the plateau.
Apparently no such climatic change is recorded elsewhere, and the
rapidity demanded seems impossible of realization.
The other possible explanation is that the Spokane flood was a
gigantic "jökulloup," such as have occurred in Iceland repeatedly
when volcanic activity has broken out beneath the cover of an ice
cap. But nothing has been found in the literature to suggest Pleis-
tocene vulcanism in the area which was drained across the Columbia
Plateau during this episode.
This content downloaded from
72.233.202.181 on Wed. 14 Jun 2023 02:01:57 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
