DEPARTMENT ON THE INTERIOR
BULLETIN
OR TER
UNITED STATES
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
No. 108
A GEOLOGICAL RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL
WASTINGTON
WASHINGTON
GOVEENMENT PRINTING ONRICK
1803


U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVE
RULIETIN NO. 108
PL. I
о
WALL
INDEX MAP.


DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
BULLETIN
OF THE
UNITED STATES
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
No. 108
WASHINGTON
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
1893


UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
J. W. POWELL, DIRECTOR
A
GEOLOGICAL RECONNOISSANCE
IN
CENTRAL WASHINGTON
BI
ISRAEL COOK RUSSELI
WASHINGTON
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
189 3


CONTENTS.
Letter of transmittal
Outline of this paper.
Introduction ...
Geography of the region traversed
Geological formations.
Crystalline rocks
Kittitas system
Columbia lava.
John Day system
Glacial records
Lake Lewis..
Geological structure
Monoclinal ridges
Monoclinal folds
North and sonth elevations
Mountains of donudation
Volcanic mountains.
Level-floored valleys
Summary ..
General principles pertaining to artesian wells
Geology of the counties examined.
Yakima county .
Lowlands along the Columbia
Rattlesnake mountain
Horseheaven plateau
Satas creek
Satas ridgo ..
Simcoe landslido...
Topinish landslide
Snipes mountain.
Yakima valley (in part)
Yakima ridge
Selah ridge.
Atanum and Moxee valleys
Selal valley.
Wenas and Naches valleys
Yakima canyon
Uptanum ridge
Kittitas county
Kittitas valley.
From Ellensburg to Wenache
Okanogan county.
Approach to Lake Chelan
Lake Chelan ..
Page.
9
11
13
15
20
20
20
20
22
25
26
28
28
29
30
30
31
31
31
32
37
37
38
40
42
48
48
49
51
53
54
60
61
65
66
61
68
71
76
77
80
5


6
CONTENTS.
Geology of the counties examined--Continued.
Douglas county...
Wenache to Waterville and Chelan crossing
Chelan crossing to Grand Conlee
Grand Coulee.
Lakes .
Saddle mountain..
White bluffs on the Columbia
Absence of artesian basins ..
Conclusion in reference to artesian water supply in the region explored,
APPENDIX. Report on fossil plants from ear Ellensburg, Washington, by F.
H. Knowlton
Index.
Page.
83
84
86
90
92
96
97
99
100
103
105


ILLUSTRATIONS.
PLaTE I. Inder map.....
are a rose
II. Geological sketch map of central Washington
III. General view of Simcoe landslide
IV. Talus slopes on cliffs left by Simcoe landslide
V. Topinish landslide, from below
VI. Topinish landslide, from above ..
VII. Yakima canyon, looking toward Kittitas valley
VIII. Gravel terrace in canyon of the Columbia, near Chelan crossing.
IX. View near the head of Lake Chelan, looking west
X. Bowlderg of basalt on Great Plain of the Columbia
XI. Stream terraces, Foster creek
XII. West wall of Grand Coulee ...
Fig. 1. Ideal section showing a normal fault
2. Ideal section of an artesian basin (after Chamberlin)
3. Ideal section of the border of a basin deposit.
• Pago.
......Frontispiece.
12
46
48
50
52
66
76
80
88
90
92
28
32
33
4. Ideal section of an artesian basin with defective substratum (after
Chamberlin) ..
34
5. Ideal section explaining the occasional failure of well in an artesian
basin ..
6. Ideal section showing how a pervious bed may be charged from below.
7. Sketch section of Satas ridge ...
8. Sketch section of Snipes mountain.
34
35
46
49


v
LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL.
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR,
UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY,
Washington, D. O., January, 5, 1893.
SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith for publication as a bul.
letin of the Geological Survey a paper entitled " A Geologieal Recon-
noissance in Central Washington," by Israel C. Russell.
This work was initiated by your instructions of March 22, 1892, to
investigate the vicinity of Yakima, Washington, with special reference
to artesian resources. Mr. Russell was detailed as my assistant in this
work and remained in the field until June 30. His studies were not
limited to Yakima valley, but extended over a large portion of the
country bordering upon the Great Beud of the Columbia, and have
satisfactorily solved the artesian problems to which they were directed.
In addition to this specially economic phase of the work he has made
a large contribution to the knowledge of the structure and geologic
history of that region.
While Mr. Russell was investigating artesian resources the writer,
before going south to continue field work in Oregon and California,
spent a few weeks of April and May making a preliminary examina.
tion of the coal bearing metalliferous and other formations of Wash.
ington. The mines at Wenache, Pechastin, Roslyn, Carbonado, Wilk-
inson, Newcastle, Hamilton, and elsewhere were visited, and marine
fossils were collected at Clallam bay, Snohomish, and near the Duwa
mish, to acquire the information necessary to properly direct future
investigations within the state which will form the subject of a paper
to be hereafter published.
On accòunt of the important economic bearing of Mr. Russell's re.
port I respectfully urge its immediate publication.
Very respectfully, your obedient servant,
J. S. DILLER,
Geologist in charge of Cascade Division.
Mr. G. K. GILBERT,
Chief Geologist, Washington, D. C.
9


OUTLINE OF THIS PAPER.
This is a report on a geological reconnoissance in the central part of the state of
Washington, undertaken for the purpose of ascertaining to what extent the condi-
tions there existing favor the project of obtaining artesian water for irrigation.
The region traversed embraced about 10,000 square miles, situated in the arid re-
gion east of the Cascade mountains, and draining to Columbia river. A sketch map
of the geology of this region is presented on PI. II.
GEOLOGICAL FORMATIONS.
Crystalline rocks.-The oldest rocks in the area explored are schists, granites, and
quartzites, occurring north of the Great Bend of the Columbia.
Kittitas system.-Resting on the eroded surfaces of the crystalline rocks is a series
of sandstone and shales of early Tertiary age which contain valuable coal seams.
These rocks occur at the surface to the west of the Columbia and adjacent to the
Cascade mountains. The coal at Roslyn is in. these rocks. 'The system is well ex-
posed in the western part of Kittitas county, and hence is named provisionally the
Kittitas system.
•
Columbia lava. -The principal formation in central Washington is a great series of
lava sheets which have been outpoured in successive eruptions in such quantities as
to completely conceal the relief of the land which was inundated by the fiery flood.
'This series of lava sheets is of such vast extent that it is the eqnivalent of some of
the most important systems of sedimentary rocks. It extends south from Washington
into Oregon and California, and east into Idaho. Its entire extent is unknown, but
is thought to cover wot less than 200,000 square miles to an average depth of about
2,000 feet. It is the greatest lava sheet now known. The rock is principally if mot
wholly basalt, which came to the surface through fissures and was spread out in
successive flows at intervals thronghout a long period of time, as is shown by fossil
forests inclosed between the lavers at a number of horizons.
John Day system.-This system consists for the most part of unconsolidated sand
and clay, together with large quantities of lapilli and volcanic dust, and has a
thickness in some localities of over 1, 000 feet. It is well reposed in the White
bluffs on the Columbia, and in Moxee, Weuas, and Kittitas valleys. The strata
composing the system were deposited in a great water body called Lake John Day
which existed in late Tertiary times between the Cascade and Rocky mountains.
Glacial records.-After Lake John Day was drained and its sediments and the
rocks on which they rest uplifted into mountains and deeply eroded, there came a
climatic change which admitted of the existence of glaciers in the Cascade and Rocky
mountains. A great glacier then filled the valley now occupied by Lake Chelan;
another descended Okanogan valley, and crossing the Columbia spread out a sheet of
morainal material and thousands of huge bowlers over the northern part of Doug-
las county. Columbia river was dammed by these glaciers and escaped southward
through Grand Conlee.
Lake Lewis.-The glaciers from the north ended in a large lake, the northern shore
of which crossed the central part of Douglas connty, and is known as Lake Lewis.
Icebergs floating on this lake carried their freight of bowlders over the Great Plain
of the Columbia and into many valleys opening from it.
11


12
OUTLINE OF THIS PAPER.
GEOLOGICAL STRUCTURE.
After the deposition of the John Day system the rocks throughout central Wash-
ington and also over a vast region lying to the south were broken by a large number
of fractures, some of them scores of miles in length, and the included blocks tilted
in various directions so as to form monoclinal ridges or gently sloping tablelands.
The displacement along many of these fanlts was between 2,000 and 3,000 feet.
Between the steep, marrow ridges there are level-floored valleys in which the
John Day beds still retain their horizontal position. In a few instances the borders
of the valleys have been raised so as to form artesian basins.
GENERAI PRINCIPLES PERTAINING TO ARTESIAN WELLS.
In this section the conditions are brief y considered, under which subsurface wa-
ter may exist under pressure, so as to rise to the surface whew wells are drilled.
Certain popular fallacies relating to artesian wells are also pointed ont.
GEOLOGY OF THE COUNTIES VISITED.
In this section a popular account is given of the geological formation and prevail-
ing structure met with in each of the counties visited, and in each region the
conditions bearing on the question of subsurface water supply are pointed out.
As the region explored is one of a few within the United States concerning which
there is but little information to be obtained from books, our sketch has been given
something of an itinerary character.
Some of the alkali lakes in Douglas county are described, and an analysis is given of
the water of Soap lake. The depositton of calcium carbonate through the action of
low forms of plant life, from waters far below saturation, is briefly considered.
CONCLUSION.
The last section of the paper is devoted to a summary of the conclusions reached
in reference to the probabilities of obtaining artesian water in the region traversed.
In general the conditions are such as not to favor the drilling of more wells.
The appendix contains a report by F. H. Knowlton on fossil leaves from the John
Day system.


U.S.GEOLOGICAL
untains
Surve
T N.
GEOLOGICAL SKETCH MAP
CENTRAL WASHINGTON
ISRAEL C. RUSSELL
TOPOGRAPHIC BASE COMPILED BY SAMUEL STORRO
50 Mile
[Contour Interval 1000 Feet.)
18.92
John Dav Systen
Tenting


A GEOLOGICAL RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON.
By ISRAEL C. RUSSELL.
INTRODUCTION.
An examination of the country described in this paper was ordered
by the Director of the U. S. Geological Survey at the request of per-
sons interested in the development of the state of Washington, for the
purpose of ascertaining how far the geological structure of the arid por-
tion of the state favored the hope of obtaining artesian water for irri-
gation.
Flowing water had already been obtained at two wells in Moxee val-
ley and several other wells were in progress when my examination
began, but without a knowledge of the geology of the region over a
wide area the success or failure of these enterprises depended upon
chance. It was with the hope of being able to direct the search for
artesian water so energetically begun that a geological examination
was undertaken. The conclusions reached are in general not favorable
to the view that a large portion of the central part of the state can be
irrigated by artesian water, but it is hoped that by pointing out the
unfavorable conditions a considerable waste both of capital and energy
in drilling useless wells may be avoided.
During the reconnoissance I was accompanied by Mr. Samuel Stor-
row, civil engineer, residing in North Yakima, who is especially inter.
ested in the various problems connected with the irrigation of the adja-
cent region, and has a personal knowledge of several of the deep wells
already drilled. I am indebted to Mr. Storrow for much general as.
sistance, and especially for the topographic base of the map forming
Pl. II, which was compiled and drawn after his connection with the
Geological Survey had been discontinued.
Our work began on April 1 and ended June 30, 1892. The route
traveled during this interval is shown on Pl. I, which will assist the
reader in deciding to what extent the conclusions advanced in this paper
are based on personal observations and will also serve in a measure to
indicate the degree of confidence to be placed in them.
13


14
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON.
[BULL. 108.
The region described embraces about 10,000 square miles situated
east of the Cascade mountains in the central part of the state of Wash-
ington. Its relations to adjacent areas are shown on the index map, •
Pl. I, and its principal topographic features are represented, so far as
the scale adopted will permit, on the geological sketch map, Pl. I.
As may be seen from these maps, our field of study lies wholly within
the hydrographic basin of Columbia river. A large portion is drained
by Yakima river, the principal tributary of the Columbia from the west.
Our travels embraced the eastern portions of Yakima and Kittitas
counties, the southern border of Okanogan county, nearly the whole of
Douglas county, and small portions of the western borders of Adams
and Franklin counties. The principal towns visited were Pasco, North
Yakima, Ellensburg, Wenache, Waterville, Chelan, and Coulee city.
The Northern Pacific railroad crosses the southern portion of the
area examined, and the Great Northern railroad was being built across
its central part during the season of our visit. Owing to the shortness
of the time available for fieldwork and the great extent of territory
that it was desirable to study, our examination was necessarily a re-
connoissance and can not be considered as a survey. The region was
previously almost entirely unknown geologically, and for this reason,
at least, it is thought that the results reached will be of interest.
The main object of the present paper is to direct the attention of the
people of central Washington to the features in the geology of their
country which bear on the possibility of obtaining subsurface water
under pressure. The better those interested in drilling wells are
acquainted with the geology of the country in which they work, the
more likely are they to avoid carrying on their search in unpromising
localities. For this reason, as well as to make my report intelligible
to a wide circle of readers, I have endeavored to avoid the use of
technical terms and to tell the geological story in simple language.
In compiling the topographic base of the accompanying map, free
use has been made of the published and unpublished work of the
North Transcontinental Survey carried on under the direction of
Prof. Raphael Pumpelly; of the survey of Columbia river by Lieut.
Thomas W. Symons;? and of maps published by the United States
Land Survey. In writing the following pages the report of Lieut.
Symons and a short paper by Bailey Willis,' geologist of the North
Transcontinental Survey, on Changes in river courses in Washington
territory due to glaciation, have been consulted.
' Map bulletin No. 1. By E. W. Hilgard. New York; 1883.
Report of an examination of the upper Columbia river, 47th Congress, Ist session. Senate Ex. Doc.
No. 186. Washington; 1882.
3 U. S. Geological Survey, Bulletin No. 40. Washington; 1887.


GEOGRAPHY OF THE REGION TRAVERSED.
The geography of central Washington can not be fully understood
until its geological structure is known. It is important, however, that
the reader should keep in mind some of the more prominent topo-
graphic features of the State while studying its geology. The reasons
why it has its present relief and marked diversity will appear as we
proceed.
The Cascade mountains, trending north and south, divide the state
of Washington into two strongly contrasted portions. On the west
there is an excessively humid and densely forested country, sloping
precipitously to the lowlands bordering Puget sound and the Pacific.
On the east, the descent from the snow clad summits of the mountains
is equally abrupt at first, but the foothills extend far eastward and
inclose many charming valleys, shaded by park-like groves of pine and
carpeted with luxuriant grasses and flowers.
The Cascade mountains are largely composed of recent volcanic rocks,
poured out as molten lava or ejected as scoria and ashes during times
of violent eruption, as is testified by the great craters which give
them dignity and prominence. The greatest of these volcanie cones,
and at the same time the most conspicuous to the inhabitants of the
region here described, is Mount Tacoma, the elevation of which, ac-
cording to measurements by the United States Coast and Geodetic
Survey, is 14,440 feet. Another remarkably attractive mountain, as
seen from the low country to the east, is Mount Adams, nearly 10,000
feet high, situated 50 miles south of Mount Tacoma and rising as a
massive truncated cone, white with snow, far above the densely wooded
hills at its immediate base. This is also an ancient crater, and, like
Mount Tacoma, has been considerably modified by the action of rain
and glaciers, although its volcanic heat is not yet entirely dissipated.
The descent from the summit of the Cascade mountains to the Great
Plain of the Columbia varies from 5,000 to nearly 14,000 feet. The
general elevation of a large area in the eastern part of the state ad-
iacent to the Columbia is from 600 to 1,000 feet.
There are several narrow mountain spurs from 50 to 75 miles in
length, extending east from the immediate foothills of the Cascades,
which divide the desert valleys as with a wall, and are among the most
remarkable features in the relief of the land. These ridges frequently
rise from 2,000 to 3,000 feet above the adjacent plains, and have a gentle
slope on one side, conforming with the dip of the strata of which they
are composed, but break off abruptly in bold scarps in the opposite di-
rection. Numerous examples of these monoclinal ridges are furnished
by east and west uplifts in the eastern part of Yakima and Kittitas
counties.
Nearly all of these terminate before reaching Columbia
15


16
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON.
[BULL. 108.
river, but one of the most typical, known as Saddle mountain, extends
25 miles east of the river, and forms a narrow, sharp-crested ridge,
rising 1,500 feet above the adjacent desert. This ridge runs directly
across the course of Columbia river, but the stream had its way es-
tablished before the mountain was upraised, and has cut a deep notch
through it at Sentinel bluffs. Other similar " gates" through narrow,
precipitous ridges occur along Yakima river, which, like the Columbia,
had its course established before the present topographic relief of the
land was initiated.
None of the peculiar ridges referred to are due to the cooling of lava
streams flowing away from the great volcanoes to the west, as has been
suggested by certain writers. On the contrary, they are portions of a
vast series of lava sheets which were at first horizontal, but have since
been broken by fractures radiating in a general way from the main
uplift to the west, and the edge of the strata on one side of a line
of fracture upraised into a mountain ridge. Modifications of this struc-
ture where the displacement is small have produced long, narrow
arches in the strata.
In the northern part of our field, in Okanogan county, the general
relief is greater than in the remainder of the region shown on the ac-
companying map. The mountains are there composed of crystalline
rock of greater age than the rocks in other portions of central Wash-
ington. This has also been a land surface for a long time, and the
drainage system is well developed. The mountains on the upper courses
of the rivers have rounded forms, and are separated by deep-stream
channels, which divide and subdivide as one follows them upstream.
Recent changes in the direction and character of the streams have been
produced in many instances by the temporary occupation of their val
leys by glaciers, and their lower courses have in several cases been
given new direction or wholly obstructed by lava flows.
East of the Columbia there is a striking change in the topography.
This is the lowest part of the great valley between the Cascade and
the Rocky mountains, and resembles in many ways the continuation of
the same great depression farther south, known as the Great Basin.
An observer looking over this region from some commanding summit
on its western border has spread before him a vast treeless plain, the
general elevation of which at the south is 600 or 700 feet above the
sea, and about 3,000 feet adjacent to the mountains bordering it on the
north. The secondary relief of this region is but slight, and in a
general view the desolate land appears to be a limitless plain. On
clear days, when the prevailing desert haze is absent, the dim outlines
of the Blue mountains in Oregon may be distinguished far away to
the southeast. To the left of these may be seen the more prominent
peaks in northern Idaho belonging to the Rocky mountain system.
The summits of the distant ranges are white with snow during the
winter and early spring, and it is with difficulty that they can be dis-


RUSSELL.]
GEOGRAPHY OF THE REGIONS TRAVERSED.
17
tinguished from cloud banks which float above them; in summer, if
seen at all, they appear as shadowy mountains dimly outlined through
the heated and much disturbed atmosphere above the desert.
'The country east of the Columbia, which seems a plain in contrast
with the rugged lands about it, is the northern exteusion of a vast lava-
covered region, embracing part of Idaho, Oregon, and California, as
well as hundreds of square miles in Washington. Portions of the
cooled and hardened lava flood are still horizontal, but the greater
part has been upheaved and much broken, as well as deeply eroded,
since it was spread out in a molten condition. In central Washington,
however, and particularly in Douglas county, the disturbances that
have affected the lava are less conspicuous than in many other parts
of the formation. In spite of mumerous minor inequalities, this region
has received the name of the "Great Plain of the Columbia;" more fa-
miliarly it is knoin as the "Big Bend country," from the fact that it
is embraced in a great western curve of the Columbia river.
'The Great Plain of the Columbia is treeless, except for a small area
on the immediate brink of the canyon bounding it on the northwest,
where there are small groves of pines. 'The lower, and by far the
greater, part of its area is a sagebrush-covered desert, very similar to
the desolate valleys between the desert ranges in Utah and Nevada.
In its northwestern part, however, where the lava has been upraised
'so as to form a tableland nearly 3,000 feet in general elevation, the
desert character is less strongly pronounced, sagebrush is absent, and
the land is one vast prairie of waving bunch grass. The uplifts on the
west side of the Columbia, formed also by the tilting of portions of the
old livid sheets, are likewise remarkable for the luxuriance of their
natural meadows. The richest of these smallor plateaus is known as
Horscheaven, on account of the abundance of its pasturage.
The most southern of the swift, high-grade rivers draining the east
slope of the Cascade mountains is the Klickitat, which flows south
between the main uplift on the west and the upraised border of the
basaltic plateau country to the east. This stream lies south and
west of the country described in the following pages, and but little is
•known concerning it.
The Yakima river, next north of the Klickitat drainage, is the largest
stream joining the Columbia from the west, and although too swift and
too shallow to be navigated, it is of importance on account of the great
amount of water it furnishes for irrigation and is a most interesting
example of the wav in which a powerful river can maintain its course
in spite of pronounced changes in the topography of the country through
which it flows. The ridges of basaltic rock through which the Yakima
has cut deep canyons and gateways have all been upraised since that
stream established its right of way. North of the Yakima drainage
system, and individually of much smaller extent, are the Wenache,
Uhelan, and Methow rivers. 'These flow over granitic rocks and have
Bull. 108-
-2


18
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
witnessed fewer topographic changes than the main part of the Yakima.
Their channels, although not broad, are deeply cut and show that they
have suffered but little disturbance for a long period.
The Okanogan river has its principal source north of the Canadian
boundary, and flowing south joins the Columbia. Its valley is broad,
and is bounded on the west by rounded hills of granite; on the east
there is a steey escarpment of basalt formed by the edge of an extruded
sheet of basalt which probably filled the lowest portion of the old
valley and forced the river to excavate a new channel.
Columbia river flows southward from beyond the Canadian boundary
to its junction with Spokane river; it then turns abruptly westward
on reaching the border of the basaltic rocks occupying the Big Bend
country, and after cutting across a narrow northward prolongation of
the lava fields, which, as already mentioned, filled the old channel of
Okanogan river, followed the junction of the basalt with the granite
to the north and west for about 75 miles. In this portion of its course
the great river sweeps around an irregular bend, changing its course
first to the south, then to the east, and then south again, until, on leav.
ing the country shown on the accompanying map (PI. II, it takes a
westerly course, which it holds to the sea.
On the east of the Columbia there are no streams tributary to it in
the region here treated. In the winter a few small brooks find their
way down the steep canyon wall bordering Douglas county on the west,
but they disappear in early summer. A small, irregular brook flows out
of Foster creek canyon in early summer, and another equally weak and
uncertain rivulet is precipitated over the cliffs at the north of Grand
Coulee and joins the Columbia, but precipitation is too scanty to sup-
port perennial streams.
Throughout central Washington agriculture is dependent upon irri
gation. On portions of the plateaus near the Columbia, especially in
the northwestern part of Douglas county and ou Horseheaven plateau,
in Yakima county, where the elevation approaches 3,000 feet, there is
sufficient natural moisture to admit of the cultivation of wheat without
irrigation. The crops are uncertain, however, being abundant on oc-
casional wet years, but usually averaging not over 15 or 18 bushels
to the acre.
'The soil throughout central Washington is deep and rich, and, with
the exception of precipitous mountain slopes and certain--and fortu
nately limited--portions of the valleys, where it is too alkaline, is well
adapted to agriculture. Owing to the small rainfall, the general ap.
pearance of the country is barren and sterile, yet where irrigation is
practicable the harvests are unusually abundaut. The principal crops
are hay, alfalfa, wheat, oats, potatoes, and hops, and fruits and vegeta.
bles of many kinds. The weeks and mouths of uninterrupted sunshine
during the long, hot summers admit of an almost tropical luxuriance of
plant growth when the requisite moisture is supplied. Only a small


RUSSRLL..I
PRINCIPAL TOPOGRAPHIC FEATURES.
19
per cent of the entire area can be economically irrigated, however, from
surface streams. Onthehigherplateaus, many of which have unusually
rich soil derived from'the decay of volcanic rocks, aud on the lower and
very gentle mountain slopes bordering many of the valleys, there are
large areas of fine land which are beyond the reach of all ordinary
irrigation methods, and must be reserved for grazing. The desire to
cultivate these lands has led to the search for artesian water.
In general, the region embraced in this report may be divided into
three strongly contrasted provinces: (1) The foothills of the Cascade,
with bold relief, swift clear streams, deeply out stream channels, and
fine forests. (3) The region east of the foothills, limited on the east
by the Columbia, where partially wooded ridges exteuding east and
west inclose desert, sagebrush-covered valleys. The drainage origi-
nates principally in the more elevated province to the west, and flows
eastward across the middle province to join the Columbia. (3) The
great plateau region east of the Columbia, where the relief is low, trees
are absent, streams are few and feeble, but deep canyons cut through
slightly disturbed rocks, indicate a former period of more abundant
precipitation. The land is desert-like, but produces luxuriaut bunch
grass.


.
•
GEOLOGICAL FORMATIONS.
Crystalline rocks.-The oldest rocks seen by me in central Washing-
ten are granites, schists, quartzites, and allied rocks, which occur prin-
cipally in Okanogan county. Only a small portion of this region about
Lake Chelan and along the Columbia river was visited during our
reconnoissance, but the information thus gained, together with what
could be learned from miners and others, showed that probably the
entire county, with the exception of a small area occupied by coal-
bearing rocks near Wenache, is composed of crystalline rocks. These
rocks were originally sand aud clay, deposited by water in horizontal
sheets, in the same way that the ocean is laying down sediments at the
present time, but they have been deeply buried and metamorphosed, or
changed by pressure and the passage of heated water through them,
to such an extent that their minerals have been largely rearranged and
separately crystallized, and the original horizontal stratification mod-
ified by extensive movements. The rocks forming the present surface
have been long exposed to the action of frost, rain, and to glacial abra-
sion, which has resulted in their being sculptured into the multitudes
of varying forms, to which the magnificent scenery of Lake Chelan and
neighboring regions is due.
Kittitas system. -Resting on the upturned and eroded edges of the
crystalline rocks belonging to the series briefly described above, there
is an important system of sandstones and shales, with interbedded coal
seams, which forms the surface of the country near Wenache, and
extend with increasing breadth southwest through the western part of
Kittitas county and probably also through the western part of Yakima
county. The important coal mines at Roslyn are in this system. From
the character of fossil leaves, occurring abundantly in the shale above
the coal at Roslyn, it is known that the rocks are of early Tertiary age.
The strata enumerated above form a well defined formation, which, for
convemience, is named the " Kittitas system." It is limited below, at
its junction with the upturned crystalline rock on which it rests, by a
great unconformity, and is defined above by another unconformity at
its contact with overlying basalt. Future study may show that this
system should be subdivided, but as only a small portion of the region
it occupies was traversed by me the classification here proposed will be
sufficient for present needs.
Columbia lava.- Resting unconformably on the Kittitas system and
overlapping it toward the north, there is a great series of lava sheets,
composed principally of basaltic rocks, which extend with unbroken
continuity, not only over the whole of Douglas county but the larger
portion of Yakima and Kittitas counties, and besides are known to
20


RUSSELL.]
THE GREATEST LAVA SHEET KNOWN.
21
pass southward beyond the boundaries of Washington. Although
this great series of lava sheets is irregular in many ways and of an
entirely different origin from the sedimentary beds above and below it,
yet it forms the most important geological series in the Northwest, and
one which it will be.convenient to designate by a specific name. As the
region it occupies is drained almost entirely by the Columbia river, I
venture to name it the « Columbia lava." So far as known this is
the most extensive formation of its kind in the world. Its border, with
the exception of the portion represented on the accompanying wap, has
never been traced, but it is known to occupy large portions of Oregon
and Idaho, and to extend into northern California. Its area has been
estimated at approximately 200,000 square miles, or as great as the
area of France. It is traversed by Snake river throughout its entire
course, and by the Columbia, from a locality near the mouth of Spokane
river to where the Columbia breaks through the Cascade mountains, a
distance of $00 miles. The streams tributary to the Columbia from the .
south, below the mouth of the Snake, also drain the same great lava
field. The Columbia lava is not one vast flow, but is composed of many
separate flows, sometimes separated by land surfaces, which frequently
contain the stumps of large trees, or by sheets of lapilli. The time
required for its accumulation must have been several centuries. The
sheets of which it is composed overlap and supplement each other, so
as to form one continuous but highly compound system. No single
sheet can be traced over the entire field, but yet in the sides of the deep
canyons that have been eroded in its surface, individual flows may be
followed continuously for a score or more of miles. The entire series
varies in thickness from 300 or 400 feet or less along the rim of the
canyon of the Columbia, on the northwest border of Douglas county,
to 3,700 feet, according to Le Conte, in the Cascade mountains at the
Dalles.' Its average thickness is thought by Symons? to be not far
from 2,000 feet. From my own observation this seems as fair an esti
mate as can be had until more extensive surveys have been made.
In the best sections of the Columbia lava exposed in the precipitous
walls of the coulees or canyons, is Douglas county, and in the remarka-
ble gates eroded by the Yakima river through ridges of the same mate-
rial, there are frequently six or cight distinct layers of basalt exposed,
which are from 50 to 150 feet thick. The rock is usually a compact
bluish black basalt, with frequently a well defined columnar structure,
but is also at times vesicular and scoriaceous, especially on the surfaces
of the sheets. Many times the marked columnar structure recalls the
finest of the basaltic columns so well known at the Giant's Causeway,
and on the Isle of Staffa. The walls of the conlees in the Great Plain
of the Columbia are similar to the Palisades of the Hudson, but are far
more extensive, and composed of several distinct colonnades which may
'Am. Jour. Sci., ser. Ir, vol. 7, 1874, p. 168.
Report of an examination of the upper Columbia river, p. 100.


22
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON.
[BULL. 108.
be followed for many miles. While these architectural forms suggest
the ruins of mighty temples, their extent and magnitude render the
most impressive works of man insignificant. In the region traversed by
me in central Washington there are no volcanic cones to which the lava
sheets might be traced, and no important points of, eruption have been
reported from other portions of the lava-covered country. In central
Oregon, as observed by myself during a former reconnoissance, there
are small comes of scoriaceous material on the lava, but these instead
of being points of eruption, seemed rather to be parasitic cones formed
from the lava flows themselves. On the eroded western border of the
system, some 20 miles north of Ellensburg, I saw large dikes of basalt
which broke across much disturbed beds of the Kittitas system and
connected with the overlying basalt. These prove that the basalt in
part and probably to a great extent came from below through fissures
and spread out in sheets over the land. The idea that the Columbia
lava came to the surface through fissures, and did not originate in the
mountains to the east or west, or from craters like Tacoma or Shasta,
has been entertained by several iriters, notably by Richthofen and
Geikie, but even now I feel that much more study should be devoted
to the subject before concluding that this was the mode of origin.
Near the upper surface of the Columbia lava, in the Yakima region,
there is a thin layer of clay formed as a sediment in a Tertiary lake,
and subsequently covered by a lava flow a hundred feet thick. Above
this bed of basalt and resting evenly on its surface are gravels and fine,
evenly bedded lacustral sediments, having a thickness of 125 feet: then
comes an interstratified sheet of columnar basalt, from 40 to 100 feet
thick which may be traced from the hills about Ellensburg eastward
to Columbia river and appear again in the eastern portion of Saddle
mountain. Above this laver there are other lacustral deposits forming
the John Day system, described below. Besides the widely spread in.
terstratified sheet of basalt there are other sheets more local and less
well known; one of these was penetrated in the artesian wells in Moxee
valley.
The records seen in many sections of lava and lake beds show that
the period of extensive volcanic overflow ended in a lacustral period,
during which the region from the present site of the Cascades east-
ward to the mountains of Idaho was occupied by a vast lake of Mio.
cene age, in which many hundreds of feet of sediments were laid down.
The presence of Miocene lake beds on the surface of the Columbia lava
and the occurrence of the Kittitas system of probable Eocene age below
it, show that the volcanic outbursts belong somewhere near the mid-
dle of the Tertiary, and can not be correlated with the period of general
ice invasion known as the Glacial epoch, as some writers have supposed.
John Day system.-Before the Columbia lava was broken and tilted, or,
in other instances, raised into long, narrow arches, its surface over
the whole of central Washington and probably far into Idaho and


RUSSELL.1
SEDIMENT OF LAKE JOHN DAY.
23
Oregon, wascovered by the waters of a great lake into which streams
washed mud and sand, and volcanoes, in times of violent eruption,
strewed vast quantities of fine white dust and lapilli. The accumula-
tion of fine sediment is at best a slow process, but in the instances
before us it went on with but slight changes for a sufficient length of
time for more than a thousand feet of evenly bedded strata to be laid
down one above another. The lake beds thus accumulated have been
upraised irregularly together with the underlying lava and greatly
eroded. Over large areas nearly the entire series has been washed
away, leaving the lava as the surface rock. Remnants of the John Day
beds occur throughout our field of study, with the exception of the
granitic arens at the north, but are best exposed in the White bluff's of
the Columbia, and in Wenas and Naches valleys. Owing to the fact,
however, that they occur mostly in the valleys and have been washed
away more or less completely from the uplands, they are seldom con-
spicuous. The lava, owing to its frequent high relief, appears as the
prevailing country rock, when in fact it only penetrates here and there
through the general covering of superimposed lake beds.
This formation, as shown by its fossil leaves,' is of Middle Tertiary
(Miocene) age, and is here designated as the John Day system, for the
reason that it occurs along John Day river, Oregon, and was there
first studied. The beds on John Day river have been described and
their fossils referred to many times in geological treatises, and it will
be found convenient to group under one name all of the sediments
formed in the lake from which the strata on John Day river were de.
posited.? The lake in which these sediments were accumulated may be
designated as «Lake Jol Day."
'The John Day beds are usually light colored unconsolidated sedi-
ment. In the exposure at White bluffs, the beds are all friable and
crumble to sand and clay between the fingers. Many of the strata
in fact can not be said to have been consolidated at all, as they are
fine loose sands with but little more coherence than the modern sand
dunes, into which in some instances a portion of their material has
been blown.
In Wenas and Naches valleys the beds are more compact and
partake of the character of soft sandstone. In Kittitas valley they
have been quarried for building stone, but are light and soft, although
making a good appearance as may be seen in a bank building in
Ellensburg. The quarry from which this rock was obtained at the
south end of Kittitas valley, contains clays and sandstones which are
charged with fossil leaves.
Other leaf bearing beds of the same
" A report on the fossil lenves of this system, by F. H. Knowlton, forms an Appendix
to thig paper.
" A summary of what has been written concerning this system and a list of papers
pertaining to it lavo been given by Dall and Harris in Bulletin No. 84, U. S. Geol.
Survey, pp. 280-282.


•
24
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. (BULL. 108.
character occur at John Day river. It is by comparing the fossils from
these two localities, as well as by practically tracing the beds from
one exposure to the other, that the identity of the John Day system in
general with the beds outcropping on John Day river has been estab.
lished.
The John Day system will probably interest the reader more than
any other series of rocks treated in this paper, for the reason that it
is the one from which artesian water has been obtained.
The system is limited below by the Columbia lava, but there is no
marked unconformity at this contact. As already mentioned, there are
thin beds belonging to the John Day system interstratified with the
upper layer of Columbia lava, and thin layers of lava interbedded
with the lower layer of the John Day system.
The layers of sediment interbedded in the basalt have been baked
and considerably altered by the heat of the inclosing rocks; and the
sedimentary beds immediately below the sheets of basalt in the John
Day system are also altered, while those above show no change.
The reader should bear in mind that the John Day system is com-
posed of unconsolidated lacustral sediments, of middle Tertiary age,
and that marked disturbances resulting in the formation of nearly all
the mountains of Central Washington, possibly including the Cascades,
have taken place since they were deposited; also that erosion has
removed probably the greater part of the system and cut deep can-
yons in the hard basalt on which it rests. The time since Lake John
Day existed is geologically not remote, but must be numbered even by
the most conservative at tens of thousands of years. During this time
many climatic changes occurred.
'The foregoing account of the John Day system is somewhat at vari-
-
ance with previous descriptions of what is supposed to be a southern
extension of the same formation. In describing the deposits of a Mio-
cene lake in northern Oregon Prof. O. C. Marsh ' says:
The Blue mountains formed the eastern and southern shores of this lake, but its
other limits are difficult to ascertain, as this whole country has since been deeply
buried by successive overflows of volcanic rock. It is only where the latter have
been washed away that the lake deposits can be examined. The discovery and first
explorations in this basin were made by Rev. Thomas Condon, the present state
geologist of Oregon. The typical localities of this Miocene basin are along the
John Day river, and this name may very properly be used to designate thelake basin.
The strata in this basin are more or less inclined and of great thickness. One section
near the John Day river, examined by the writer in 1871 and again in 1873, seems to in-
dicate a thickness of not less than 5,000 feet. The upper beds alone of this series cor-
respond to the deposits in the White river basin. The lower portion also is clearly
Miocene, as shown by its vertebrate fanna, which differs in many respects from that
above. Beneath these strata ase seen, at a few localities, the Eocene beds containing
fossil plants mentioned above. They are more highly inclined than the Miocene
beds, and some of them show that they have been subjected to heat. The inferior
strata elsewhere are Mesozoic, and apparently Cretaceons. Above the Miocene strata
Pliocene beds are seen in a few places, but basalt covers nearly all.
1 Am. Jour. Sei., ser. In, vol. 9, p. 52.


RUSSBLL..)
PLEISTOCENE GLACIERS.
25
In the account quoted the John Day beds are stated to occur below
great sheets of basalt, which I assume is the Columbia lava. In cen-
tral Washington the John Day beds rest on the Columbia lava. The
thickness of the strata in Oregon is nearly five times greater than the
greatest thickness discovered in Washington. I see no way of explain-
ing these discrepancies, and the records will have to stand as they are
until a more comprehensive study of the region between the Cascade
and Rocky mountains, in both Oregon and Washington, can he made.
Glacial records.-Long after Lake John Day was drained and its bot-
tom upraised into mountains and ridges, and exposed to the action of
rain and rivers until a very large part of its sediments had been car-
ried to the Pacific and deep canyons eroded in the underlying basalt,
another important entry was made in geological history of central
Washington.
During the deposition of the John Day system the climate was mild
and the shores of the great inland sea were clothed with a varied and
beautiful flora similar to that of the southern Appalachians at the
present time. But after the long interval mentioned above, there came
a climatic change which affected the whole of the northern hemisphere.
The climate was much colder than when the John Day system was laid
down and also colder than at present. The higher valleys among the
Cascades as well as all of the lower portions of Okanogan county, were
occupied by glacial ice. The depression now holding Lake Chelan
was filled from end to end by a magnificent glacier, which flowed sonth-
east and joined another similar river of ice in the canvon of the Co.
lumbia. A great glacier flowed southward down the broad Okanogan
valley, and reaching the Columbia, not only turned the river from its
course but was of sufficient volume to fill its canyon there 2.400 feet
deep, and to cross it without apparently being deflected from its gen-
cral southern course. After crossing the canyon it continued south-
ward on the Great Plain of the Columbia, grinding down and scoring
the basaltic rock over which it passed and scattering thousands of huge
bowlers over the plateau. The southern limit of this ice invasion was
in the neighborhood of Coulee city, and its extension eastward was lim-
ited by Grand Coulee. At the south it ended in a great lake, known
as Lake Lewis, briefly described below, on which icebergs floated and
carried bowlers far and wide over the region to the sonth. These
bowlders of granite, gneiss, basalt, etc., came from the north, some of
them perhaps from Canada. They are the latest of all geological rec-
ords in many portions of our field, and the one that, perhaps, claims
the greatest amount of popular attention.
The region embraced in the present reconnoisance only touches the
sonthern part of the glaciated area, and an extended study of the ice
records will have to be postponed. The glaciers flowing east from the
Cascades, in Yakima and Kittitas counties did not reach the country
traversed by me, and hence does not claim attention.


•
26
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. (BOLt. 108.
Lake Lewis.- The lake into which the ice invasion from the north
terminated covered a large area on the Great Plain of the Columbia,
but was by no means so extensive as the great Tertiary lake which
preceded it. Its northern limit crossed Douglas county from east to
west in the neighborhood of Coulee city, and bent northward in Lincoln
county, but its course to the east had not been traced. On the west
its shores were irregular, owing to Badger and Saddle mountains which
projected into it, forming long capes or islands, about which terraces,
showing the water level of the lake, were traced at an horizon of about
• 1,400 feet above sea level, or about 700 feet above Columbia river.
Lake Lewis was first recognized so far as I am aware by Lieut. T.
W. Symons and named by him in honor of Capt. Merriweather Lewis,
whose name is inseparably connected with that of Capt. Clark in the
early explorations of the Great Northwest. On a map in Symons's
report,' the region covered by the former lake is roughly indicated.
Apparently the beds forming the Johnday system were supposed by
Symons to be sediments of the younger lake, which probably led him
to extend its boundary much farther west than now appears to have
been correct. On the map referred to the southern shore of Lake
Lewis is represented as following a general east and west course through
Walla Walla and Wallula. Present information concerning the topog-
raphy of this region indicates that the boundary is much farther south
than is indicated by Symons, but even its approximate position can
not yet be stated.
The relief of central Washington has changed so little since Lake
Lewis was in existence, that if we had a good contour map of the coun
try we could trace with a considerable degree of accuracy the online
of its shore. In the absence of such a map we can only say that its
water extended far south into Oregon and probably far enough east to
cross the present Washington-Idaho boundary 'Thelake probably owed
its existence to a dam at the Dalles--perhaps a glacier then obstructed
the drainage or else there was a subsidence suflicient to allow the
ocean to enter the great central valley between the Cascades and Rocky
mountains. The water body referred to has been called a lake, not
because of the presence of fresh water fossils in its sediments, for no
fossils that can be referred to that water body have been found, but from
analogy with other great lakes which existed under similar conditions.
Lake Lewis, while of broad extent and nearly a thousand feet deep in
the deepest portion, seems from the lack of strength in the beach line
that it carved, and from the small amount of sediment it left, to have
had but a brief existence. The terraces on the flanks of the mountain
against which it washed are poorly defined and are many times want-
ing. The shore records so far as known were of the simplest kind,
consisting of cut terraces, of little strength and without the usual accom
Report of an examination of the upper Columbia river. PI. 26.


RUSSELL.]
A PLEISTOCENE LAKE.
27
paniments of bars and embankments. No deltas built by streams
flowing into the lake have been recognized, unless the heavy gravel
deposits filling the canyon of the Columbia to the depth of 700 feet in
the neighborhood of Lake Chelan be considered as of this nature.
It is to be noted, however, that the shores of the lake thus far exam-
ined are too steep and rugged to be favorable for the development of
shore phenomena. When the less precipitous eastern and southern
borders are studied they will perhaps reveal a more satisfactory history.
The sediments that can be clearly referred to this lake are scanty and
almost insignificant, but the surface of the great plain of the Columbia
and in the smaller valleys opening from it, as in the Moxee Yakima
valley, there are many large bowlders dropped from floating bergs, and
in places a thin layer of subangular gravel from the surface. Lake
Lewis existed at the time of the greatest extension of the glaciers on
neighboring mountains and was fed by their melting. It was a Pleis.
tocene water body, and had many contemporaries in the now desert
valley of the arid region between the Rocky mountains and Sierra
Nevada.


GEOLOGICAL STRUCTURE.
All of the formations mentioned in the preceding section were orig.
inally spread out in essentially horizontal sheets, but since the young.
est member in the series was laid down they have been broken into
blocks and the blocks tilted and upturned so as to form prominent
mountain ridges with horizontally floored valleys between. A structure
has thus been given to the beds on which depends nearly all of the
present topographic diversity of the region.
Monoclinal ridges. -The prevailing and most typical structure has
been produced by the breaking of the strata and the upturning of the
beds on one side of the lines of fracture. The fragments, more or less
regular, into which the rocks have been broken are termed orographic
blocks. The elevation of the edges of some of these blocks has pro-
duced ridges which are steep on one side and form bluff's in which the
broken edges of the strata outcrop and slope gently in the opposite
direction, the surface slope corresponding in general with the inclina-
tion of the beds. The fractures referred to, along which adjacent blocks
have been moved up or down in reference to each other, are known&s
faults. An ideal vertical section across such a fault is shown in the
following diagram, which will serve to define some of the terms used
by geologists in connection with such displacements:
Fig. 1.--Ideal section showing a normal fauit. The rocks to the left are a portion of the "thrown
block;" those to the right belong to the "heaved block." The "hade" of the fault is the angle which
the plane of fracture a b makes with a vertical plane a c. The fanlt scarp b dis the portion of the
fanlt plane which projects above the thrown block. In a normal fant the fault plane hades toward
the thrown block; in a reverse fault it hades towarl the heaved block. All of the faults to be
noted in this paper belong to the first type.
An example of the upturned edge of an orographic block is furnished
by the northern escarpment of the sloping table-land known as Horse-
heaven, which is well exposed in the neighborhood of Kiona and Prosser.
This long line of cliffs is a fault scarp from which the strata slope gently
southeast toward the Columbia.
Rattlesnake mountain is another uplift of the same nature, but more
abrupt and having its gentle slope in the opposite direction. The
eastern face of Rattlesnake mountain is a fault scarp 2,500 feet high.
Its crest line is sharp and its western slope conforms with the gentle
28


RUSSELL.]
STRUCTURE OF LAVA RIDGES.
29
dip of the beds with which the uplift is composed. The break, on the
west side of which the mountain was upraised, may be traced for 50
miles toward the southeast by minor scarps, which form a range of low
hills that reach the Columbia near Wallula.
Many other examples of the formation of prominent mountains in
central Washington by the uplifting of the edges of great orographie
•
blocks might be cited, but these will be described in the section of this
paper devoted to local geology.
Monoclinal folds. -Besides monoclinal ridges there are other types of
mountains in the region traversed which are not so simple in their
structure. These are long narrow ridges which were formed by an
arching of the strata without breaks. 'The arches were raised by a
force acting from below upward, and not by lateral pressure which
forced the strate into ridges and troughs, as is common especially in
the Appalachian mountains.
A cross section of one of these folds is well exposed in Union gap,
through which the Yakima river flows in escaping from the valley in
which North Yakima is located. The ridge there cut through, runs
eastward from the irregular high lands west of Tampico, and ends 5
or 6 miles east of Union gap. Throughout this distance it is a sharply
defined, even crested uplift, rising 1,000 feet above the adjacent level
floored valley, and has an arched structure throughout. At its east
end it terminates in a low point curving south, but another ridge hav.
•ing a somewhat different structure immediately begins and extends
50 miles farther east, the gap between the two being so small that
they are usually considered as a single range.
North of North Yakima there is another example of a similar nature,
but in this instance the arch is broken longitudinally, and the ridge
assumes the faulted character described in the preceding paragraph.
The ridges due to an arching of the strata pass into folds that are very
steep on one side and have a gentle slope in the opposite direction, and
these change to faults.
Just what the action was which produced these arches it is difficult
to determine. It is possible that volcanic rocks escaping in a molten
state through fissures in lower beds raised the Columbia lava and
superimposed beds into arches. In the continuation of the ridge cut
through at Union gap, whick forms the south wall of Moxee valley,
molten rock forced up from below escaped through fissures in the Co-
lumbia lava, but raised the lighter beds above into a long narrow ridge.
In this iustance the intruded lava has been clearly exposed by the
crosion of a longitudinal valley along portions of the crest of the uplift.
It seems to follow from such facts as are in hand that the fractures
which allowed of the tilting of some of the orographic blocks, in other
instances furnished a passage upward for molten matter which raised
the superficial layers of' the earth's crust into long narrow arches.
One of the popular impressions to be unlearned in reference to the


30
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. (BULL. 108.
peculiar east and west ridges of Yakima and Kittitas counties is the
supposition that they are lava streams which flowed away from the
Cascades and on cooling formed narrow precipitous ridges from 1,000 to
3,000 feet high. On the contrary, these ridges have been formed by the
elevation, principally along lines of fracture, of the Columbia lava and
.
of the overlying John Day beds, which were originally horizontal.
North and south clevation. In the castern portion of Yakima and
Kittitas counties there are also gentle elevations which trend north
and south across the much narrower and more prominent east and
west ridges. These undulations, some of which are easily overlooked
in the gentle relief, are difficult to trace to any definite dynamic action,
• but are of importance for the reason that, in connection with the east
and west ridge, they take part in the formation of basins, of which
Moxee valley is an example, having such a shape that they become
reservoirs of artesian waters. The north and south elevation preceded
the east and west breaks, as is shown by the continuation across them
of the fault scarps produced by the east and west breaks. This is
shown especially in the region of general uplifts bordering the Yakimit
hydrographic basin on the west, where the east aud west ridges of the
eastern part ot Yakima county may be distinctly traced across a broad
undulation trending north and south.
Too little is known of the structure of central Washington to war-
rant the framing of a comprehensive hypothesis to explain its struc-
ture, but the fact that the broad north and south uplifts follow the gen-
eral direction of the Cascade mountains suggests that they were
formed at the time the main mountain range was upheaved, and that
subsequent movements produced cross fractures which radiate from
the main elevation. It seems probable that the Cascades are formed
to a large extent of tilted blocks of basalt which were originally hori-
zontal, and belong to the same series as the Columbia lavas farther
east, which have been, in comparison, only moderately disturbed. The
Cascade mountaius, at least in the State of Washington, do not seem
to have been formed mainly by the piling up of erupted material as
has been suggested in explanation of their origin farther south, but
are due to the uplifting and tilting of previously consolidated lava
sheets, as well as of granite and coal-bearing strata, which occur high
up on each flank of the mountain, and even from portions of the main
divide. The great volcanoes which appear so prominent along the gen-
eral trend of the range are secondary to the main mountain-building.
The lava sheets in central Washington have been separated from the
Cascades by erosion, as is shown by the presence of the Kittitas sys.
tem in the deeply dissected country at the eastern base of the range,
dividing it from the the lava-covered country to the east.
Mountains of denudation.-In the northern part of our field especially
in Okanogan county, there are lofty and exceedingly rugged mountains
of crystalline rock, in which the diversity in relief is due to the sculptur-


RUSSELL..]
ORIGIN OF THE RELIEF OF THE LAND.
31
ing of a great uplifted mass of the earth's crust, by atmospheric agen-
cies. The individual peaks and scrrate ridges as well as all of the
detail to which these mountains owe their picturesqueness, is due to
the cutting out of the valley and canyons and not to the separate ele.
vation of each towering summit. They are mountains of erosion,
although the general relief is due to the elevating of a great mass of
material which was formerly deeply buried in the earth's crust. In
these mountains there is a structure not yet studied, which modified
the action of the various erosive agencies, but scarcely render it neces-
sary to qualify the statement that the topographie diversity is due to
sculpture. In this respect the relief of the gramite region differs fiom
that of the younger rocks to the south, where the main features in the
present topography are due to the upraising of the ridges and not to
the down-cutting of the valleys.
In the Kittitas system there are folds probably due to lateral pressure,
but these were produced before the outpouring of the Columbia lava
and do not affect the topography of the surface where the lava occurs.
West of the lava where the Kittitas system occupies the surface, the
relief although modified by the structure, is due mainly to erosion
which has removed material from the valleys and left the interstream
spaces in relief.
Volcanic mountains.-'The more prominent summits of the Cascade
mountains, as already stated, have been formed by the piling up of
volcanic rocks about the vents from which they came. There are no
mountains of this type in the region described in this paper, but the
prominence of the volcanoes of the Cascades, as yet scarcely extinct,
renders them an attractive object-lesson to all who live in their vicinity.
Level-Moored valleys.-The valleys between the ranges in Yakima
and Kittitas counties, and over a large portion of the region east of
the Columbia, have horizontal layers of John Day beds and Columbia
lava beneath. The strata flooring the valley are horizontal and as far
as we can judge, have remained so since they were deposited. These
undisturbed regions form valleys for the reasou that the ridges sepa-
rating them have been upraised. These broad undisturbed areas, as
well as the structure of the intervening ridges, show that there has been
no lateral pressure of such a nature as to form anticlines and synclines.
Much of the region in the Great Plain of the Columbia falls in this
division.
Summary.-Briefly stated, the main structural features in our field
are (1) narrow, sharp-crested ridges having a prevailing east and west
trend, due to the upheaval of the borders of orographic blocks; (2)
broad and comparatively gentle north and south clevation, produced
apparently by an arching of the strata, parallel to and probably of the
same date as the much greater uplift forming the Cascade mountains;
(3) regions where the rocks have been but little disturbed and now
form plains and valleys,


GENERAL PRINCIPLES PERTAINING TO ARTESIAN WATER.'
The conditions on which the flow of water from artesian wells de.
pend are simple and easily understood. To illustrate by an elementary
example, suppose the following diagram to represent an east and west
section of a valley 20 miles broad. A section north and south would
show the same structure; that in the rocks form a basin. The rocks
are in layers like a pile of saucers; some of the layers are composed
of clay which is water-tight, while others are of sand through which
water can percolate. Rain falling on the edges of the upturned layers
of sand inclosed between layers of clay, penetrate them and fill them
with water up to the lowest point on their rims, where it will leak
out and form springs.
Let a hole be drilled through the upper layer of clay in the central
part of the basin, say at D in the diagram, and the water which satu-
rates the laver of sand below the clay will rise and overflow at the surface.
It the well has a water-tight casing and an open tube be carried up from
E
FiG. 2.-Ideal section illustrating the chief requisite conditions of artesian wells.
A, A porous
stratum; B and C, impervious beds below and above A, acting as contining strata; F, the light of
the water level in the porous bed, A, or. in other words, the height of the reservoiror fountain head;
D and E, flowing wells springing from the porous water-tilled bed, A. (Chamberlin.)
it, the water will rise in the tube until it stands approximately on a
level with the lowest point in the rim of the basin of sand.
The water rises in the tube because of the pressure of the water at
a higher level in the sand. The layers of sand through which the
water slowly flows, and the well connected with it, may be considered
as a single tube. Everyone knows that water poured into a tube bent
down in the center will rise to the same height in each arm. A tea-
kettle filled with water is an illustration of this principle; the water
in the kettle and in the spout will stand at the same level. The same
• simple principle governs the flow of artesian wells.
In the search for artesian water one finds many modifications of the
conditions described above. Among these are changes in the charac-
ter of the water-bearing beds, or of the impervious beds above or be-
low. The water-bearing bed may change its character and have clay
mingle with the sand in certain areas, thus obstructing or stopping the
"For a more complete discussion of the conditious limiting the existence of artesian
water than is here practicable, see The requisite and qualifying conditions of artesian
wells, by T. C. Chamberlin, U. S. Geological Survey, 5th Ann. Rept.
32


RUSSELL.
CONDITION OF ARTESIAN FLOW.
33
flow of water through it. When this happens, although the basin may
have the requisite form and several alternating pervious and imper-
vious strata about its margin, a well drilled in the central part may
not be successful, while one near the border, which escapes the reigon
where the sand is charged with clay, may give an abundant flow.
A change in the character of the pervious layer rendering it imper-
vious sometimes makes it possible to obtain flowing water when the
rocks do not form a basin but slope in one direction for a long distance.
These conditions are sometimes produced in the deposition of sedi-
ments in the ocean or in lakes, owing to the fact that coarse material,
such as gravel and sand, are deposited near shore, while finer sedi-
ments, as clay, may be carried a long distance before being dropped.
The same bed thus changes from gravel to sand and then to sandy
clay, and finally to clay as oue follows it from the shore seaward. A
penliar modification of these conditions is illustrated in the following
diagram, which should be of interest to those engaged in searching for
flowing water in the desert valleys of the arid region.
Fia. 3.-Iden soction of the border of a basin doposit.
'The diagram represents a vertical section ot the superficial deposits
in a valley adjacent to a mountain range. In arid regions the valleys
in many instances have been occupied by lakes at a late geological
period. During the existence of the lakes sands and gravels were de-
posited along their borders, and fine sediments in their deeper portions.
When, owing to climatic changes, the lakes became shrunken, coarse
material was carried farther and farther out from the mountains and
either deposited about the border of the lake as alluvial material or
spread out by their waters as sheets of sand and gravel. When the lakes
again extended and were enabled to deposit clays over broader areas,
the fringe of coarse material adjacent to the mountains became covered
by an impervious layer. These varying conditions in many instances
gave origin to extensive deposits of gravel and coarse debris, which are
thick near the borders of the valleys and thin out toward their centers,
and are interstratified, especially on their attenuated margins, with
layers of fine, impervious material. The present scanty rainfall and the
flow of streams across the outcropping borders of the coarse deposits
tend to keep them saturated with water; but as they thin out and are
replaced by impervious layers the water is unable to escape. Under
these conditions a hole drilled in a position corresponding with W in
Bull. 108-
-3


34
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
Fig. 3 will penetrate the water-bearing strata at a point below the leveï
of the source of supply, and, in consequence of the hydrostatic pres-
sure, water will rise and overflow at the surface. Many of the flowing
wells in Utah, Nevada, and California depend on these conditions.
Failure to obtain flowing water even when an examination shows
that a given region has the requisite structure may result from one or
more of several causes.
In the arid region the rainfall on the outcropping surface of a porous
stratum may not be sufficient to fill it, or if already completely charged
when first penetrated, may not be sufficient to supply the drain made
by one or more flowing wells.
The layer inclosing the water-bearing stratum may be broken so as
Fla. 4.-Ideal section illustrating the failure of an artesian well because of defects in the confining
bed below a water bearing stratum. A and B, porous beds; D and I, impervious beds; C, a defectivo
confining bed; E, the water level of the stratum B; G and HI, wells that do not flow. The bed A might
give a flow at G and H but for the defect in C, which permits the water to descend into B and escape
through its outcrop, which lies below the surface of G and H. (Chamberlin.)
to allow the water to escape. When an outlet is found through the
layer below the porous stratum the water will escape and issue from a
spring at some lower level, as shown in the following diagram:
When a break occurs in the overlying impervious layer the water
will escape upward, thus relieving the pressure, and saturating super-
ficial deposits percolate away and form springs in depressions.
Another source of failure when all the requisite conditions are pres-
ent is sometimes experienced by beginning a well on ground that is
higher than the artesian head, perhaps within the actual artesian basin,
but more frequently on its border. To illustrate, if water stands at
the horizon A A in the pervious layer, shown in the following diagram,
Fig. 5.-Ideal section showing the failure of wells in artesian basin.
because of an outlet somewhere at this horizon, and holes are drilled at
X, the water will fail to reach the surface because the tube through
wlich it would have to rise opens above the horizon at which the water
stands in the reservoir.
The water would rise in wells at X, up to the horizon of the artesian
lead, but no farther. A well drilled at W would flow, because the sur
face at that point is below the horizon at which the water naturally es-
capes from the pervious layers.
The conditions shown in Fig. 5 illustrate the lack of consistency in
confining the term "artesian" to wells that overflow. The water in the
well at X is under the same pressure as in the well at W, but the tube
is too long to allow it to rise to the surface.


RUSSELL.]
FALLACIES CONCERNING ARTESIAN WELLS.
35
In describing the conditions which combine to make an artesian basin,
I have assumed that the water was supplied directly by the rain falling
on the outcrops of the porous strata. While this is unquestionably the
method by which water usually finds its way into artesian reservoirs,
yet there is a modification of the process which sometimes makes arte-
sian wells possible in unpromising situations. 'The pervious layer from
which a well is supplied may be charged through fissures in the imper-
vious layer beneath, either from the upward leakage of a lower basin
or by fissure springs, such as exist in many regions where the rocks
have been much disturbed.
The charging from below of a pervious bed, so shaped and inclosed
as to form a basin, is a matter of interest to the readers of this report,
since the Moxee basin, in which three successful wells are now flowing,
seems to receive its water in this way. The manner in which a curved
pervious sheet, inclosed in impervious beds, may be charged with water
from below is shown in Fig. 7. Like several diagrams already printed
this is a vertical cross section.
The shaded beds, forming the bottom of the basin, are rigid and have
been faulted; the faults extend into the sands and clay above, and the
displacement becomes a monoclinal fold, perhaps with some fracturing.
Fig. 6. Ideal section of a pervious bed charged with water rising through a fissure.
Water rising along the fault plane penetrates the overlying porous
layers and saturates them to as great a height as the pressure of
the water from below will allow, say to the horizon A B. a well
drilled in the valley, so as to penetrate the water-charged strata below
this horizon, would open a way for the water to reach the surface. The
source of the water which rises along the fault in the bottom of the
valley, as supposed above, may be far away and traverse irregular
cracks or partially filled fissures for long distances. Water might also
reach a basin not so situated as to receive a supply from surface out-
crops, by the leaking upwards of a lower artesian basin.
There are a few popular fallacies which need to be disregarded by
those searching for artesian water. One of these is that the water flow.
ing from artesian wells is derived from open spaces or caves in the
rocks, or else circulates as streams through underground channels.
Such openings seldom exist, and, if they did, the search for them by
drilling holes would be too uncertain and too expensive to be war-
ranted. On the contrary, the water percolates through porous strata.
The best water-bearing layers would be those of loose texture, like
sheets of bowlders and coarse gravel, but commonally they are sand-
stone or loose unconsolidated sand.
Another mistake is that artesian water is looked for because there


36
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
are highlands in the neighborhood, from which it is supposed to flow.
This may be a favorable condition or the reverse. If the highlands
are composed of stratified rocks, dipping towards the supposed loca-
tion, all may be well; but if the elevated region is composed of strata
dipping away from the site chosen, or if it is composed of volcanic
rocks which break through sedimentary beds, its influence may be
negative or decidedly adverse to the result desired.
Perhaps the most widely spread fallacy concerning artesian water,
and one frequently advanced by those pecuniarily interested in having
work done in a definite locality regardless. of the result, is that, "if
you go deep enough flowing water will be reached." The absurdity of
this assumption will be shown, I think, even to the most sanguine, by
inspecting Figs. 2 and 3. Plainly, if a well is carried through the
pervious beds without reaching water, there is no hope of success in
lower lavers. In cases where there is no artesian basin it is plain that
the deever one sends his drill the worse he is off.
The depth to which artesian wells designed for irrigation can be car-
ried is also limited commercially. Just as many large tracts of rich
land can not now be advantageously irrigated, on account of the ex-
pense of bringing water to them in ditches, viaducts, etc., so an arte-
sian basin may be so far below the surface, and the rocks to be passed
through in reaching it so expensive to drill, that as a business enter-
prise it will not pay.
As will be shown in the following pages the rocks in the arid portion
of central Washington which have yielded artesian water, and the
only ones from which a supply for irrigation can be expected, are the
John Day beds. These are composed of alternating layers of gravel,
sand, clay, volcanic dust, etc., and over broad areas have sheets of
basalt interstratified with them. Some of the layers are porous, while
others are so fine and compact that water can not percolate through
them. When this series has been bent upward in such a manner as
to form basius, the condition for holding water so as to give an artesian
head are obtained. When such basins are found it may still be a ques-
tion whether the outcropping edges of the porous layers receive suffi-
cient rainfall to fill them; and also whether in the formation of the
basin the rocks have been fractured so as to allow the water to escape.
The John Day beds rest on a great thickness of stratified basalt, in
which there are certain thin layers of porous lapilli, and old land sur-
faces now containing the remains of fossil forests. The basalt is not
only difficult to penetrate with a drill, but is so thick and the chances
of their containing water-bearing layers so slight, that although they
may form basins, yet practically the search for artesian water is con-
fined to the sedimentary beds resting upon them. When these occur
in basins of sufficient depth and extent, further study is warranted in
order to determine secondary conditions; but when they do not form
basins, or when they have been eroded out of a valley, leaving the Co-
lumbia lava exposed, search for artesian water will be fruitless.


GEOLOGY OF THE COUNTIES EXAMINED.
YAKIMA COUNTY.
My reconnoissance covered about two-thirds of Yakima county, leav.
ing unexplored an irregular belt, from 30 to 50 miles broad, extending
eastward from the crest of the Cascade mountains. The recent dis-
covery of anthracite coal at Cowlit pass, in this unexplored tract, shows
that an importaut chapter in the geological history of the county there
*awaits investigation. This region also contains much that is especially
attractive to the general traveler in search of the picturesque and
beautiful. It is a land of magnificent mountains and wild canyons,
and is clothed with forests up to the beginning of the snow fields on the
higher summits. Mount Tacoma, the loftiest peak in the state of Wash-
ington, stands near its western border, while Mount Adams, even more
prominent as seen from many points of view to the eastward, is wholly
within the limits of the county. Many mountain lakes, surrounded by
rugged slopes still clothed with forests, all in the freshness and wild-
ness of their natural beauty, occur along the eastern slope of the range.
'The streams flowing from these fountains have carved deep canyons
through lava rocks, or where their task was less difficult, have spread
out sediments so as to form natural meadows of great luxuriance.
This mountain belt is without roads, and can be traversed only by fol.
lowing the few trails that penetrateit, thusadding the zestof exploration
to the charm of the natural surroundings. From some of the secoudary
mountain crests to the eastward, I had most enticing glimpses into this
attractive region, which tempted me to leave the arid lands which
claimed my attention and enjoy the cool shade, clear, sweet water, and
pleasant camp grounds of the forested uplands. The agrienltural
wealth of the county, however, is in the less picturesque central and
eastern portions. The gray sagebrush plains separating the desert
ranges become abundantly fruitful when they are nourished by irriga-
ting waters, and it was in this region that our search for artesian basins
was to be carried on.
The portion of Yakima county that was examined is drained almost
entirely by Yakima river, and lies east of an irregular north and south
line passing near Fort Simeoe, Tampico, and the junction of Tiaton
creek with Naches river.
In this section of the county practically all of the rocks are black,
compact Columbia lava and light colored sediment of Lake John Day
which rests upon it. The attention of the reader will be occupied prin-
cipally in tracing the deformations by faulting and arching that the
Columbia lava has undergone and in noting the results of erosion
37


38
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
which has removed the John Day beds from the uplands and in many
instances cut deep trenches in the lava beneath. The mountains are
composed essentially of basalt and many of the valleys are still deeply
filled with lake beds. The mountains are the prominent topographic
features and always claim their full share of attention, but the valleys
are of even greater interest, as they contain the rich agricultural land
for which water is needed.
Lovlands along the Columbia._-The country on the east border of
Yakima county adjacent to the Columbia is low and forms a triangu-
lar area of about 50 miles long from northwest to southeast, and 20
miles broad at the north. The southern point of the triangle is a
few miles north of Wallula; from there it widens northward and attains
its greatest width opposite White bluffs. The elevation of the desert
tract over large areas is less than a hundred feet above the Columbia,
but increases in height toward the mountains bordering it on the west.
The rocks beneath the plain are Columbia lava, mostly concealed by a
thin covering of John Day beds. The amount of lake beds that have
been removed from this area is indicated by the thickness of the same
system in the bluff's forming the east bank of the Columbia. The beds
now finely exposed on the east bank of the river formerly extended west.
ward over the plain adjacent to the Columbia, and have been removed
principally through the agency of rains and rills and by the Columbia
itself, which is still working its way eastward, perhaps in obedience to
the dip of the rocks beneath, which is possibly still undergoing change.
The rocks beneath the plain dip gently eastward from a fault, as will
be explained later; a slight movement along this fault, tending to raise
the western edge of the thrown block, would have a direct effect on
the course of the streams flowing over it.
On the surface of the plain there are broad areas occupied by drifting
sand, which every breeze busies itself in building into new forms. The
sand dunes present their steeper slopes to the east, thus showing the
direction of the prevailing winds, and the course they themselves are
traveling. In places they are encroaching on the river and adding to
the material with which its brown current is. already loaded.
Yakima river, flowing from the west, crosses the lowlands bordering
the Columbia, and has sunk its channel through the John Day beds and
into the basalt beneath to a depth regulated by the level of the Co-
lumbia. The lower portion of the stream, not being able to cut deeper,
has begun to broaden its channel and to meander from side to side.
The west margin of the plain along the Columbia is determined for
more than 40 miles by a displacement named " Rattlesnake fault," for the
reason that its upheaved side forms Rattlesnake mountain. Besides
Rattlesnake mountain there are several smaller uplifts situated on the
same line of fracture toward the southeast, and reaching the Columbia
about 3 miles north of Wallula. North of Rattlesnake mountain the
border of the plain is less regular than farther south, and is formed by


RUSSBLL.]
EASTERN BORDER OF YAKIMA COUNTY.
39
the ends of mountain ridges which trend east and west and terminate
somewhat abruptly at their eastern extremities where they disappear
beneath the desert. One of these ridges touches the Columbia at
Priest's rapids, causing the river to change its course abruptly, and
then passing beneath the level of the plain appears again some
6 or 8 miles to the east as a group of long narrow hills having a com-
mon east and west trend and rising from the plain like lost mountains.
From the roof-like appearance of these uplifts they have been called
the "Gable hills."
The Columbia plain is thus bounded on the west by a series of faults.
The rocks beneath the plain do not form a single block, however, as is
shown by a low fault scarp parallel with the great Rattlesnake fault
and 3 or 4 miles east of it. This displacement forms a range of low
hills running southeast past Baxter.
On the surface of the plain, where not covered with drifting sand,
there are scattered bowlders of gramite, gneiss, basalt, etc., dropped from
icebergs floating in Lake Lewis, the shore lines of which are dimly
shown on the lower scarps produced by the Rattlesnake fault. In the
banks of Yakima river, where it crosses the plain adjacent to the Colum-
bia, there are small exposures of John Day beds and of sheets of basalt
interstratified with them. At the east base of Rattlesnake mountain,
also, there are several stream channels which have been cut down into
basalt. These sections show that the remnants of John Day beds on the
plain are thin. A well dug at the east base of Rattlesnake mountain,
near its sonthern end, showed that the surface soil is there but a few
feet deep and rests on basalt about 60 feet thick, beneath which there
are soft sands and clays at least 50 or 60 feet thick. The layer of basalt
penetrated by this well is the layer found so generally in the eastern
part of Yakima county near the base of the John Day system.
Much as artesian water would be prized in the desert tract described
above, its presence is not to be expected, for the reason that the John
Day beds are thin and in places scarcely conceal the basalt beneath.
The great thickness of the Columbia lava renders it inexpedient to
search for a deeper source on account of the expense of drilling, even if
the general conditions were favorable. Besides, Rattlesnake and other
faults along the west side of the plain necessarily cut off an under-
ground water supply from that direction; and as the general inclination
of the strata beneath the plain is eastward, a source in any other direc
tion seems equally impossible.
The conclusion just stated receives support, also, from the record of a
well, 600 feet deep, drilled at Paseo, where the conditions are essentially
the same as on the west side of the Columbia. No definite record of
this well has been obtained, but it is reported to have passed through
the following beds without reaching flowing water:
Sand ..
John Day beds
Columbia lava
Feet.
72
200
330


40
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. (BULL. 108.
The fractures along the northeast base of Rattlesnake mountain have
opened a way through which subterranean waters rise to the surface.
One of the springs on this line of faulting situated on the south margin
of the valley known as Higgins bottom, is one of the largest springs in
the country. Both northward and southward of this fountain there
are smaller springs, which also flow throughout the year, and, like
fissure springs generally, do not show variation dependent on monthly
changes in the local rainfall. In Higgins bottom near the end of
Yakima ridge, and forming the source of Higginbottom creek (also
called Rattlesnake spring by many ranchmen) there is a spring dis-
charging, by estimate, a little more than a cubic foot per second. This
is also a perennial spring, and is reported to flow summer and winter
without visible change. The water rises through soft lake beds, from
a concealed fissure below, and, together with the occasional surface
drainage, has cut a canyon, in the soft strata, a quarter of a mile long
and 50 or 60 feet deep. The stream flowing from this spring is 8 or
10 miles long in early summer, but disappears before reaching Yakima
river, into which the drainage from that portion of the desert formerly
flowed.
Rattlesnake mountain.-This sharply defined uplift, although only
about 20 miles long, is one of the most typical monoclinal mountains in
central Washington. Its sharp, well-defined crest is curved so as to be
convex toward the northeast. Its northeast escarpment is an exceed.
ing bold bluff rising nearly 3,000 feet above the plain extending from
its base to Columbia river,' and is formed by the broken edges of the
strata of Columbia lava, which dip gently toward the south and south-
west, and give the mountain its long gentle, southern slope. Owing to
the fact that many landslides have fallen from its precipitous north-
eastern face, the outcrops of the beds on that side have been covered
with debris and greatly obscured. The character of the exposures to
be seen, however, suggests that the heavy layers of the basalt are sep-
arated by thin sedimentary layers or by sheets of lapilli, thus giving
'the conditions favorable for the formation of landslides. The fault
producing Rattlesnake mountain has such a great displacement that it
may bring up the rocks on which the Columbia lava rests, but whether
this is the case or not could not be satisfactorily determined, owing to
the vast amount of debris covering and concealing the lower portion
of the escarpment.
The southwest side of Rattlesnake mountain has a long, gentle slope,
as just stated, conforming with the dip of the strata. Near the crest,
as is common in many similar uplifts, the dip is quite steep, averaging
perhaps 15 or 20 degrees, but soon decreases to 8 or 10 degrees, and
grows gradually less and less until the beds become horizontal in the
valley at the base of the mountain.
Elevations on the crest of the ridge, according to the North Transcontinental Sur-
vey, are 3,558, 3,515, and 3,420 feet above the sea. The elevation of the Columbia
river at Pasco is about 380 feet.


RUSSELL.]
VIEW FROM RATTLESNAKE MOUNTAIN.
41
The crest is formed of a hard layer of columnar basalt, but a little
way down the southwest slope sedimentary beds occur, in which there
is at least one interstratified sheet of basalt, having a thickness of from
50 to 70 feet. This interstratified sheet marks a secondary crest on the
southwest side of the main crest, owing to the unequal waste of hard
and soft beds, but it is not conspicuous for the reason that the disinte.
grated rock is not removed as fast as it is formed, and hence the char-
acter of the rocks beneath is obscured.
The southwest slope of Rattlesnake mountain is covered with soft
John Day beds, which have been cut by many small streams flowing
down the mountain side during the occasional heavy rains. These
stream channels are peculiar, owing to the fact that they are steep on
one side and have a gentle slope in the opposite direction. The streams
cut down through the soft beds until they meet a layer of basalt, which
has a gentle inclination not coinciding with the direction in which the
water flows, and then tend to follow down on the hard layer, but in so
doing are forced to remove greater and greater quantities of soft strata
as they proceed. The result is that the soft beds stand in a steep bluff
on one side of a stream, while the opposite bank is a gentle slope formed
by the hard sublayer. In the northern portion of the, mountain, the
dip of the hard layer is, in general, westward, and the streams have
their steep bluffs on the west side.
In viewing the southwest slope of the mountain from a distance,
especially near sunset, it will be noticed that many of the stream chan.
nels scoring its surface are curved to the left in reference to their
direction of flow, i.e., they are concave to the east. The reason for
their general curvature is not apparent in the slope of the strata or in
the nature of their material. What the true explanation may be,
whether due to the earth's rotation or some other cause, remains to be
decided after more careful study.
To obtain a general knowledge of the character of the uplifts in the
eastern part of Yakima county and of the broad plateau east of the
Columbia, one can not do better than to climb Rattlesnake mountain
and study the relief of the country spread out at his feet. In such a
view one sees a vast plain to the east, with scarcely any relief, the limits
of which are but dimly suggested by the Blue mountains of Oregon to
the sontheast, and the higher peaks of the Cabinet mountains in Idaho
to the east. Across the plain winds the Columbia, its course rendered
especially distinct by the bluff's of white rocks forming its eastern bank.
Between the observer and the river lies the desert plain described in
the preceding section. The most interesting feature in the topography
of the land in view, however, is the series of mongelinal hills marking
the course of Rattlesnake fault toward the southeast. This fault, de-
fined at the north by the bold uplift on which the reader in fancy is
standing, first makes a symmetrical curve 20 miles in length, convex
toward the northeast; it then extends southeast, at first with a gentle


42
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON.
[BULL. 108.
concavity towards the east, then becoming nearly straight; but on look-
ing along the series of crests marking its course, we find that it is
slightly convex toward the west. The total length of the graceful
double curve is about 50 miles.
The small uplifts marking the southern extension of the fault, like
the great cliff to the north, present bold escarpments to the east,
which are from 400 to 500 feet high and slope gently westward in
conformity with the dip of the beds of which they are composed. The
southern extension of the fault is not marked by one continuous scarp,
but by a series of long, narrow ridges. Each indiaidual ridge is ac-
companied by a short lateral escarpment extending nôrthwestward from
the main fault, and making an angle with it of about 300 by
estimate; these branching escarpments are formed by cross breaks,
thus admitting of the elevation of separate portions of the border of the
main fault.
South and west of Rattlesnake mountain we look down on a
broad desolate valley, the southern limit of which, 6 or 8 miles distant,
is determined by another abrupt escarpment, produced by the upraised
border of another fault block, the gentle slope of which is southward.
The crest line of this uplift as seen from the north appears nearly level,
and beyond it we can see portions of the gently sloping plateau formed
by the surface of the tilted block, and known as Horseheaven.
The valley intervening between Rattlesnake mountain and Horse.
heaven expands to the north, and beyond it there are several monoclinal
ridges having a history similar to the uplifts just noticed, but too dis.
tant to be clearly recognized from the crest of Rattlesuake mountain.
Far beyond these indistinet ridges rise the snow-clad summits of the
Cascade mountains.
What especially strikes the attention of the observer viewing the
magnificent panorama surrounding Rattlesnake mountain is the deso.
lation of the scene. Not a trace of the deep green of forests or of the
more vivid tints of cultivated fields arrests the eye. There is not a tree
in sight, except on the far-off western mountains. Thelightat midday is
blinding in its intensity, and the absence of shadows renders the far-
reaching picture flat and expressionless; the surface of the desert land
becomes heated and the waving atmosphere renders all but the nearer
objects uncertain. But when the oblique lights of evening cause the
mountains to cast long shadows on the plains, and each drainage line
and fault cliff is brilliantly illuminated or dark with shadows, the scene
acquires a new life. The character of the topographic forms and the
main features in the geological structures then stand out with such won-
derfuldistinctness that one may read the history of the land as clearly
as if it had been carefully modeled for his study.
Horseheaven plateau. Horseheaven is the name given by ranchmen
to the broad, sloping plateau in the southeast part of Yakima county,
south of Yakima river, which is bounded on the north by the fault scarp
noticed to the south of Rattlesnake mountain. In a state of nature this


RUSSELL.?
STRUCTURE OF HORSEHEAVEN PLATEAU.
43
upland was covered with luxuriant bunch grass and afforded abundant
pasturage. The rainfall is there more abundant than in the adjacent
valleys, and wheat is now grown on the more favorable portions with-
out irrigation.
The northern border of Horseheaven plateau is formed by a great
displacement, having two branches which meet near the town of Kiona,
a station on the Northern Pacific railroad. The shorter of the two
fault lines runs southeast from Kiona and dies out at a distance of
8 or 10 miles; but the longer rm can be traced by its great scarp
for over 50 miles toward the southwest. Near Kiona, where the two
faults unite, the escarpmeut is 1,600 feet high. The southeastern arm
decreases gradually in elevation and finally merges into the plain, but
the larger northwestern arm maintains a remarkably straight course,
rising toward its western terminus and traversing a region of general
elevation bordering the Yakima hydrographic basin on the west. The
fanlt scary is thus shown to be of' later date than the region of general
elevation which it crosses. Other faults crossing the same range of
foothills farther north will be noticed later. The great Horseheaven
escarpment, with a gently undulating crest line, slightly notched in
places by stream channels, appears like a mountain wall when seen
from the valley to the north. The rocks forming it, like the beds on the
precipitous face of Rattlesnake mountain, are mainly Columbia lava,
but the outerops are largely concealed by landslides. The slides have
formed many small, undrained basins on the face of the steep slope, and
also irregular lines simulating terraces. A very large portion of the
details in this, as well as many other fault scarps formed of broken
strata of Columbia lava, are thus accounted for. Reference to similar
features in other uplifts will occur again and again as we proceed.
The reasou why landslides have been so numerous on the steep slope
of Columbia lava, whether formed as fault scarp or as precipices due to
the undercutting of streams, is because the strata are in layers, sepa-
rated in some instances by thin sheets of lapilli or of clay and sand,
which weather out and allow large slices of the denser rock resting on
them to break off. In the greater fault the rock beneath the Columbia
lava may have been brought to the surface, thus furnishing a soft layer
below a hard one, and again favoring the production of landslides.
The crest line of the Horseheaven fault scarp is formed of a layer of
basalt sharply upturned, back of which, toward the plateau formed by
the surface of the upheaved block the dip decreases and becomes more
and more gentle until the rocks 10 miles distant from the fault are
practically horizontal.
Far away to the softheast there is another uplift running about
parallel with the longer arm of the Horseheaven fault, but far smaller
in all of its dimensions. This ridge was not closely examined, but its
appearance, as seen from a distance, favors the idea that it was also
formed by upheaval along a line of displacement.


44
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. (BULL. 108.
A well has been drilled at the joint expense of Yakima county and
the state of Washington on Horseheaven plateau, about 5 miles from
the great fault bordering it on the north. This well is in section 16,
township S north, range 26 east, Willamette meridian. It has a depth
of 630 feet and passes through the following strata, as I have been
kindly informed by Mr. Thomas F. Corbett, the contractor in charge
of the work:
Feete
Soil.
18
Basalt
212
Clay, soft, black
70
Basalt
170
Sand rock
160
If there has been no mistake in this record it shows that the pas-
sage from the John Day beds to the Columbia lava is there quite differ-
ent from what it is in other portions of the county where natural ex-
posures or the records of other wells show the succession of the strata.
The first and second beds of basalt are thicker than elsewhere, as is
also the sedimentary laver below the second basalt. I call attention
to this simply as a matter of record, as it is not to be expected that a
series of strata, in part sedimentary and in part of erupted rocks, will
retain the same individual thickness for any considerable distance.
Variation and rapid changes are to be expected instead of the exten-
sion of the same sequence over wide areas.
If the Horseheaven plateau were a basin instead of being a sloping
table land, the section given above would indicate favorable conditions
for obtaining artesian water, but as the strata slope away from a great
fault and are not again upraised so as to form a basin, the probability
of their receiving water and of retaining it under the requisite pres-
sure is but slight.
Satas creek.-North of the louger arm of the Horseheaven fault •
and bordered on the north by another similar uplift known as Satas
ridge, there is a tract of moderately elevated country 6 or 8 miles
broad, which slopes gently eastward toward Yakima river and is
drained by Satas creek. The dip of the strata corresponds approxi-
mately with the slope of the plateau. This is a portion of the elevated
basaltic region bordering the drainage of Yakima river on the west,
and is included between two east and west faults.
The interesting feature of this region is that the main trunk of Satas
creek as well as all of its larger branches flow through steep. walled
canyons 300 or 400 feet deep. The general section exposed in the sides
of the canyons is as follows:
Clay, soft, sandy, light colored
Quartz pebbles, coated with iron oxide, and sand
Basalt...
Clay, soft, sandy, light colored.
Basalt in thick layer.
Feet.
0_20
30-50
40
100
175-200


RUSSELL..]
STRUCTURE OF SATAS RIDGE.
45
On the borders of the canyons the layers of soft material above the
interstratified basalt are wanting, and have also been eroded away
from all of the higher portions of the region, but toward the Yakima
they increase in thickness and form the desert surface for several miles
in breadth adjacent to the river. Midway up the slope the streams
have cut wide valleys through the 40-foot layer of basalt and much nar-
rower channels in the lower and heavier layer beneath. In this way a
broad terrace has been formed which follows all the windings of
the gorges. In the scarp of this terrace the white lake beds are some-
times exposed. The terraced canyons branching in every direction
through the sloping plateau produce most interesting and beautiful
topographic forms, and everywhere reveal a richness of detail that is
bewildering to the eye.
Along the main drainage line the canyon bottoms are filled with
groves of cottonwood trees, while the plateau surfaces in the inter-
stream spaces are bare of all vegetation except sage brush and bunch
grass. In places where the canyons are shallow the tops of the trees
within are flush with the surface of the plateau between the drainage
lines, making a mosaic of brown and green as one looks down on the
deeply dissected plateau. These narrow, steep-walled canyons are a
good example of young stream channels and like nearly all of the topo-
graphic features of the region underlain by Columbia lava show that,
as geologists reckon time, the rocks have not been long exposed to the
action of the atmosphere, or else, owing to climatic conditions, the
action of the subaerial agents which sculpture the land has been slow.
Satas ridge.--I have adopted this name for the prominent east and
west ridge of basalt separating the drainage of Satas creek from that
of Topinish creek. The highest peak on the ridge is named Satas
peak on the maps published by the North Transcontinental Survey and
has an elevation of 3,000 feet above the adjacent valleys.
Satas ridge is very similar to the west arm of Horseheaven fault, and
begins at the west in the rugged basaltic region separating the drain.
age of Yakima river from that of Klickitat creek. The ridge crosses
this rugged, deeply dissected region, the general trend of which is
north and south, at right angles, forming an east and west ridge, which
at once attracts the attention as being different from the surrounding
topography, due to the erosion of an upheaved mass that is with.
out any well-defined form. The great fault scarp on leaving the high-
lands is prolonged into the valley to the east and divides it like a wall.
The ridge holds its characteristic form for 20 miles and ends in a
low point which passes beneath the level, sage brush-covered plain,
close to the Yakima river and about 5 miles from a short, sharp uplift,
known as Snipes mountain, in the center of the valley.
Satas ridge is monoclinal with an average dip at the crest of 8 or 10
degrees. The dip soon decreases to the eastward, however, and the
strata merge with the gently tilted rocks in the deeply dissected re.


46
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. BULL. 108.
gion drained by Satas creek. The north side of the ridge is steep and
bold, and is formed of the broken edges of the inclined basaltic strata.
In all of its principal features it agrees with the Horseheaven and
Rattlesnake uplifts, already described.
On following the ridge eastward I found that the monoclinal struc-
ture was well defined to within about five miles of its eastern termi-
nus, where a low pass occurs, which is crossed by a wagon-road. At
this pass and thence eastward to the end of the ridge, the rocks form-
ing the edge of the thrown block, that is the beds beneath Topinish
valley, are bent upward and form a secondary ridge along the base of
the main escarpment. The uplift is there really a fold which has been
partially broken down by weathering. The outer layer of soft beds
have been mostly cut away, leaving an interstratified sheet of basalt
variously inclined and in places standing in relief. South of the
wagon pass, the interbedded basalt arches over the top of the ridge
from the east and forms a flat table on the summit, with light colored
lake beds beneath it. A sketch section of the ridge at this locality is
shown below.
S.
N
Topenish
C valla
Fig. 7.-Sketch section across Satas ridge. A A, Columbia lava; C C, layer of basalt interstratified
with soft John Day beds.
Farther east the covering of lake beds and of interstratified basalt
has been more completely removed, but occurs at intervals all the way
to the end of the ridge, either on the gentle southern slope or at the
base of the steep northern escarpment.
If weathering had not taken place the ridge would be a long, narrow,
monoclinal uplift, formed by the upheaval and tilting of the south side
of a great fault which decreased in throw toward the east and changed
to a monoclinal fold before disappearing beneath the plain. The weath-
ering of this uplifted ridge and the falling of landslides from its steep
northern face has produced the secondary topographic features which
now give variety to the primitive form.
On the crest of the ridge, near Fort Simeoe, there are large stumps
of fossil oaks and pines projecting 3 or 4 feet from the surface of
lapilli which showered down about them from some neighboring vol.
cano and buried them in the position in which they grew. They stand
at right angles to the gently sloping surface in which their roots are
inclosed. The stumps are now exposed at the surface owing to the re-
moval of several hundred feet of John Dav beds with interstratified
sheets of basalt from above them, and are relics of a great forest, as


U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
BULLETIN NO. 108 PL. MI
GENERAL VIEW OF SIMCOE LANDSLIDE.


RUSSELL./
RECENT LANDSLIDES.
47
fragments of similar fossil trees are found at about the same horizon
in the rocks at points scores of miles apart, throughout central Wash-
ington. During the intervals between the eruptions of the various
thick sheets of Columbia lavi, the surface of the previously formed
layer was disintegrated sufficieatly to form a soil on which forests grew,
only to be buried beneath the mext succeeding shower of volcanic ashes
and lapilli; this layer in turn became buried beneath subsequent lava
flows. Heated waters percoating through the rocks dissolved the
woody tissues and replaced them, atom by atom, with silica. In this
way the grain of the wood, as well as the knots and even the most mi-
mute pores and ducts, has beer. accurately reproduced in stone. When
sections of the fossil wood, ground down until they become thin enough
to be translucent, are examined under the microscope, the minute
structure is as faithfully shown as if a thin shaving had been taken
from a living tree. Millions o' years have passed since the fossil wood
was formed and the species which it represents no longer live.
On the steep northern escarpment of Satas ridge there have been
many laudslides caused by tho breaking away of portions of the face of
the fault scarp. Two of these are of large size and of such a recent
date that the scars they left are fresh in appearance and unclothed
even with lichens. These breaks seem to have been formed within the
past few years, but on inquiring of the Indians living in the adjacent
valley, I found that they did not know when they were formed and had
no traditions concerning them.
The larger of the slides referred to is situated about 5 miles southeast
of Fort Simcoe and will be called the " Simcoe landslide;" the smaller
is some 15 miles further cast, may be plainly seen by travelers over
the Northern Pacific railroad after passing Topinish station, in going
east, and will be called the " Topinish landslide."
Simcoe landslide.-The mass of rock which broke off from the face of
the ridge and formed the Simeoe landslide is about half a mile long and
ploughed out onto the plain for a distance of nearly a mile. At the foot
of the steep broken scarp left on the face of the ridge, there is a deep
narrow valley, bounded on one side by the mountain and on the other
by the backward slope of the nass which fell. In this basin there is a
lake about 2 acres in extent, without surface outlet. The mass which
fell is broken and exceedingly irregular, but slopes from the steep ridge
near the base of the mountain down to a thin edge at its outer margin.
The tract of country covered by the fallen mass is rudely semicircular,
but somewhat pointed at the center of the curve. About its outer
margin and forming a rude senicircle of irregular hills, looking like the
terminal moraine of a small glacier, is the material pushed ahead of the
mass which fell. These hills are from 200 to 250 feet high, with very
steep outer slopes. The material ploughed up is composed of loose
rocks, volcamic lapilli, and lake beds. In this material the trunks and
brauches of fossil trees occur in considerable number. The singular


48
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BOLL. 108.
topographic forms produced by the slide have been but slightly modi-
fied by erosion, as the rain falling on the disturbed tract finds its way
out through the loose rocks and forms springs about its lower margin.
A valley which existed previous to the landslides was obliterated by
it, but is still clearly marked below the outer, moraine-like hills.
The features described above may be recognized in the illustrations
forming Plates mI and IV. The first is a general view taken half a mile
in front of the pushed-up ridge, over the top of which the surface of
the fallen mass may be seen; above this is the steep scarp left on the
mountain face. Plate iv is a nearer view of the precipice left by the
slide, which is now largely covered by talus slope.
Topiwish landslide._-This is smaller than the one near Fort Simeoe,
and did not force up au outer-moraine-like ridge. The mass which fell
is piled in confused heaps and ends in a low slope. A general view of
this slide taken from the left bauk of Topinish creek, is presented in
Plate v. Another view taken from above, looking down on the con-
fused piles of loose stone composing the fallen mass, is shown in Plate
VI. The scarp in the foreground in this view is the backward slope of
the fallen mass. Topinish creek was turned from its course by the slide
and now makes a broad bend in order to get around it.
These fresh slides, the details of which are unmodified and clearly
visible, serve to explain many irregular features in the topography of
neighboring fault scarps, in which a large part of the secondary topo-
graphic features have been produced by ancient slides, the character-
istie features of which have in many instances been greatly modified
by weathering.
The principal topographic forms resulting from the falling away of a
portion of a steep scarp, are the scars left on that mountain and the
confused piles of debris lower down. There are also irregular terraces,
and inclosed basins which sometimes hold ponds of considerable size,
but more frequently the basins are Hoored with mud and in later stages
are overgrown with grass and shrubs. The basins are due to the fact
that a sliding mass of rock frequently leaves a space between it and
the cliff from which it broke away. Basins are formed also, because the
surface of the sliding mass after it comes to rest usually slopes back-
ward, toward the cliff from which it fell; for the reason, as is well
known, that the base of a mass of rock or earth that has broken away
from a steep slope comes to rest at a lower angle than it occupied
before the catastrophe, and also because the falling mass is frequeutly
broken into separate blocks or minor slides, which pile up on one
another, thus giving to the surface a backward slope.
Swipes mountain.-This narrow isolated ridge is about 6 miles long
and rises above the surrounding desert to a height of 400 or 500 feet;
it stands on the left bank of the Yakima river, 5 or 6 miles east of the
eastern end of Satas ridge. Its general trend is nearly southeast,. or
at right angles to the direction of the great fault scarp described above.


U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
BULLETIN NO. 108 PL. IV
TALUS SLOPES ON CLIFFS, LEFT BY SIMCOE LANDSLIDE.


RUBSBLL..
STRUCTURE OF SNIPES MOUNTAIN.
49
In the central portion of the uplift the strata dip away from the
main axis at an angle of from 20 to 30 degrees, but the crest has been
broken and eroded away so as to form a longitudinal valley, as indi
cated in the following cross section:
W
E
FIG. 8.-Sketch section through Snipes mountain.
The lowest rock exposed in the central valley is scoriaceous basalt,
on which rest fine light-colored lake beds, about 100 feet thick, together
with beds of volcanic dust having concretions of yellow chert at the
base. Above the lake beds there is a sheet of basalt 30 to 40 feet thick
forming the outer slope of the ridge in most places, and resting on this
are other lake beds. At the contact with the overlying basalt the lake
beds show considerable metamorphism. On the surface of the inter-
stratified basaltic sheet there are the remains of a laver of yellow peb.
bles and fine lake beds. In the southern part of the ridge the beds on
the southeast side of the break have not been elevated, and the uplift
is there a simple fault scarp in which the strata dip eastward.
Scattered over the hills are blocks of granite and other rocks, only
found in place far to the north. These are a portion of the widely
spread drift carried over the valley of central Washington by bergs
floating in Lake Lewis.
The trunks of fossil trees are reported to have been found on the
south slope of the ridge.
The outcrops of scoriaceous basalt in the bottom of the valley in
the crest of the uplift are not sufficiently well exposed to allow one to
decide whether it was intruded since the beds above it were deposited,
or whether it is a portion of the upper layer of the Columbia lava. Its
scoriaceous character and an apparent alteration of the sedimentary
beds resting on it suggest that it was intruded at the time the ridge
was upraised.
Snipes mountain is an interesting example of the way in which small
faults sometimes occur in the bottom of valleys, and will be referred to
again in discussing the manner in which the porous strata flooring a
valley may be charged with water from below. Another instance of
this same nature will be noted in Selah valley.
Yakima valley (in part). -The Yakima river, after passing through
Union gap 6 miles south of North Yakima, flows through a broad sage-
brush-covered plain which is exceedingly fertile, where water can be had
for irrigation. A large portion of this valley on the right bank of the
river is now included in the Yakima Indian reservation. Forty-five
miles east of Union gap, between Rattlesnake mountain at the northern
escarpment of Horseheaven, the valley again contracts and the river
escapes through a narrow canyon sunken about 100 feet deep in basalt.
Bull. 108-
-4


50
•A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
The valley is floored throughout with fine lacustrial sediment resting
on basalt, as is shown in numerous sections where the rocks are
upturned in the bordering highlands and in Snipes mountain, just
described, which stands in the center of the basin. The occurrence of
basalt at the surface where the river leaves the valley shows that up.
stream from that locality there is a basin of basalt which is occupied
by John Day beds. These beds are of fine sandy clay and well exposed
along the Yakima, where bluffs 50 feet high occur on the convex sides
of the curves formed by its meandering. The best example of such an ex-
posure is at site of the new town of Zillah, which unfortunately has been
placed on the bank of the stream where it is being rapidly cut away.
The portion of the Yakima valley referred to, although irregular and
partially divided by Satas ridge, is surrounded on all sides by uplands
formed by an elevation of the strata, thus forming a basin. So far as
its structure is concerned it presents conditions favorable for an arte.
sian water supply. The lacustral sediments which partially fill the
basin are not of great thickness and do not extend up its western
slope where the greatest amount ofrain falls. On the abrupt northern
slope and on the long gentle ascent extending to the top of Rattlesnake
mountain but little precipitation takes place, probably not more than
6 or 8 inches annually. These facts indicate the conditions that are
unfavorable for a subterrauean water supply.
Another unfavorable circumstance is that at Snipes mountain, which,
as already explained, rises in the central part of the basin and is due
to the fracturing and upheaval of the beds forming its floor, there are
no springs. If the superficial strata contain water bearing beds the
water would be expected to escape through this break, unless, as seems
quite possible, an extension of volcanic rocks has there occurred
which closed the fissures.
In spite of the unfavorable conditions, however, the drilling of an
experimental well would be warranted in order to determine by ac-
tual experiment if water under pressure exists in the basin. A test
well in a basin which may contain artesian water should be drilled at
its lowest point, unless there is reason to suppose that the strata are
more open near its borders than at its center. If a test well located
with judgment fails to reach water under pressure, all subsequent ex-
pense in prospecting may be avoided. If artesian water is obtained
the pressure under which it rises will determine the extent of territory
in which other wells may be drilled with a promise of success. For
example, if a well should be drilled at the lowest point in a valley and
flowing water be reached, which would rise in an open tube 50 feet
above the surface of the ground, then so much of the adjacent region
or layer below the level to which the water rose would be in favorable
territory.
The most promising locality in the valley now under consideration
for making a test well is within a radius of from 5 to 6 miles to the
west of the railroad, between Topinish and Simcoe stations. It is not


U. 6. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
BULLETIN NO. 108 PI
TOPINISH LANDSLIDE, FROM BELOW.


(USSBLL..]
MOUNTAINS NEAR YAKIMA.
51
possible to predict the depth of the strata which there overlie the
basalt, but the most probable estimate places it at 300 or 400 feet.
It is to be expected that a strata of basalt from 50 to 75 feet thick,
interstratified with the lake beds, will be met with. A test well should
be driven through this layer and continued into the next layer of
basalt that is met with, at least 50 feet, if flowing water is not previously
reached, in order to be assured that there is not more than one inter.
stratified sheet of basalt above the real floor of the basin.
• A desire to obtain artesian water at Fort Simcoe has been expressed
by persons interested in the Indian agency, but as that locality is with.
out the limits of the lake beds occupying the valley to the east, and is
situated on basaltic rocks which, as shown in neighboring exposures,
are many hundreds of feet thick, the chances of obtaining flowing
water are too small to warrant the expense of a trial.
It is perhaps not out of place for me to suggest that the streams
flowing from the forest-covered highlands west of Fort Simcoe present
good sites for reservoirs, in which enough water could be stored during
the rainy season to irrigate a large portion and perhaps the whole of
the rich valley lands between Fort Simeoe aud the Yakima river, which
can not be watered by ditches supplied by the Yakima river itself.
Yakima ridge.-This name is applied to the bold ridge separating
Atanum, Moxee, and Rattlesnake valleys on the north from the portion
of the Yakima valley described in the last section. It is not a single
elevation, either topographically or geologically, but as I do not wish
to duplicate geographical names, the designation already used will be
retained.
•The ridge begins on the west in the irregular and deeply eroded
country between the head waters of Topinish and Atanum creeks and
runs east, with slight sinuosities, for 50 miles. Its breadth seldom
exceeds 1 or 2 miles, even when its gently sloping borders are
included, and in general it rises from 1,000 to 1,800 feet above the sur
face of the adjacent valleys. At the east it approaches and in a manner
merges with the northern portion of the Rattlesnake uplift. It is
crossed at right angles by Yakima river, which has cut a deep gorge,
known as Union gap, through it. In the walls of this gorge the arched
strata of basalt of which the ridge is composed are well exposed.
The portion of the ridge through which the Yakima has cut a channel
has been formed by an abrupt arching of the Columbia lava and of
the John Day beds resting on it. Erosion has since removed the soft
superimposed beds from the elevation, but their upturned edges may
be dsitinguished in places along either base of the ridge. The key to
the structure is furnished in part at Union gap, where the arching of
the basalt may be seen, but is more readily recognized about 5 miles
farther east, where the basaltic ridge dies out and passes beneath
undisturbed John Day beds. A low gap then occurs, which affords an
easy passage for the wagon road connecting Moxee valley with
Konewock. On the west side of this pass, and extending nearly to


52
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON.
[BULL. 108.
Union gap, there are good exposures of John Day beds which have been
turned up on the flank of the ridge into a vertical position. These
outcrops reveal a thickness of approximately 1,200 feet, and exhibit the
characteristics of the beds which floor the adjacent valleys. The con-
tinuation of Yakima ridge eastward from Konewock pass has a differ-
ent structure from the portion already described. On following the.
crest of the ridge eastward one will find places where the beds have
been notched by lateral streams and a central or longitudinal valley
also eroded. In such localities it will be seen that the beds sloping up
• on each side of the ridge--but much more markedly on the south side-
are composed of fine clay and sand, together with lavers of volcgnic
dust, and inclose a single sheet of columnar basalt about 40 feet thick.
It is the outcropping edge of the upturned sheet of basalt, that has
produced the most marked of the secondary topographic forms to be
seen along the summit of the elevation. Between the V-shaped notches
made in the basalt by small streams flowing off from the ridge, the
hard layer extends far up the slope and sometimes reaches the top of
the uplift. The strike of the secondary ridge follows the gentle curves
of the main elevation, and on looking along the crest it may be distinctly
recognized for several miles.
In the bottom of the longitudinal valley, between the main ridge and
the secondary crest formed by the interbedded sheet of basalt on the
east, there are occasional exposures of scoriaceous basalt which has
been injected from below into the fine lake beds, hardening them and
otherwise changing their character along the surface of contact. In
part, at least, the injection of molten matter from below has been in
strumental in lifting the John Day beds and interbedded basalt into
the long, narrow ridge which we now find. The explanation of its origin
seems to be that there was a break, and probably a fault, in the Colum
bia lava, which caused an elevation of the soft beds resting on it with-
out breaking them, and also admitted of the extrusion of molten lava,
which found its way into the soft strata and raised them still more, but
did not break completely through and overflow.
The Yakima ridge as a whole shows considerable diversity of struc
ture. From the mountains on the west, where the ridge is first clearly
defined, eastward to Konewock pass it is an arch, with possibly a break
along portions of the northern base. At the east end of this section
it decreases in height, at the same time broadening and curving south.
ward, and ends in a low point which passes beneath but slightly dis.
turbed strata. East of Konewock pass it is principally a ridge of
John Day beds, with an interstratified layer of basalt, which have been
upheaved in part by the faulting of the much harder beds beneath and
in part by an injection of molten basalt. The weathering of the narrow
ridges thus formed has resulted in the almost complete removal of the
John Day beds from the portion west of Konewock pass, leaving only
low buttresses along the bases of the uplift, and has produced a variety
of topographic forms in the eastern continuation of the ridge. Details


U. 6. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
BULLETIN NO. 108 PL. VI
TOPINISH LANDSLIDE, FROM ABOVE.


RUSSELL.]
STRUCTURE OF EAST AND WEST RIDGES.
53
in the structure of the eastern portion of the uplift where it approaches
Rattlesuake mountain were not carefully observed, owing to the fact
that stormy weather prevailed during the time that that portion of our
field was traversed.
Selake ridge.-This ridge borders Atanum and Moxee valleys on the
north, and, like the one just described forming the south wall of the
same basin, may be divided into sections having various structures.
Starting at the west in the elevated region between the head waters of
Atanum and Cowiche creeks, and extending to the junction of Cow.
iche creek with Naches river, the ridge is formed by an uplift of Co.
lumbia lava in which the structure is indefinite, and ends in a low
point curving southward and passing beneath moderately disturbed
John Day beds.
On the east of the Naches, in the same general line with the uplift
to the west, there is a sharp ridge of upturned Columbia lava pre-
senting a broken scarp to the south and sloping gently northward.
On the lava rest light colored strata belonging to the John Day system,
with a layer of interstratified basalt about 40 feet thick. This frag.
ment of a ridge lies between the Naches and Yakima rivers, just above
their junction, and is about 2 miles long. It is monoclinal and the
John Day beds and interbedded basalt, forming its upper portion, dip
north, at first gently and then at a high augle, which soon flattens, and
the same beds pass under Wenas valley, where they are horizontal.
Dast of Yakima river the same uplift continues with a slightly varying
strike for about 40 miles and rises between Moxee and Selah valley to
an elevation of 4,150 feet, and nearly 3,000 feet higher than the adjacent
valleys. Its east end passes beneath the flat lauds bordering the Col.
umbia, without any special changes in character. In the main this
ridge is a monoclinal uplift, the gentle slope being south, and passing
beneath Moxce and Rattlesnake valleys, while its abrupt, broken face
overlooks Selah valley. At the west, near Yakima river, the fault to
which the uplifting of tle monoclinal block is due, changes to a fold, but
local modifications tend to complicate the topographic form resulting
from its weathering, so that careful attention is required to determine
the primitive form.
In the west end of the ridge, separated from the main portion by
the deep transverse canyon cut by Yakima river the east side of the
fold is wanting. It may have been cut away by the Naches, which
Hows along its base, but more probably was carried down by a fault
which may have been continuous with a break to be seen on the south
side of the ridge and east of the Yakima.
There is also a cross break running north and south which deter-
mined the course of the Yakima river. This is shown by the lack of
correspondence in the dip of the light colored John Day beds occurring
on the sides of the canyon.
East of Yakima river the John Day beds underlying Moxee valley
slope up on the flank of Selak ridge, but do not reach the summit.


54
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. (BULL. 108.
They are broken by weathering and to some extent by faulting. The
edge of the hard interbedded layer of basalt, already mentioned as be.
ing interstratified with the John Day beds, forms a secondary ridge
close to the main uplift in the vicinity of Yakima river, but recedes
more and more, as one follows it eastward, until it finally sweeps oil-
tirely across the valley, and a few miles east of Willow spring joins the
outcrop of the southern edge of the same sheet on the south. The dip
along the outcrop of this bed changes from 30 or 40 degrees at Yakima
river to 6 or 8 degrees at the east end of Moxee valley.
East of the gorge cut by the Yakima, the beds underlying Selah valley
are carried up over the top of the ridge, for a distauce of 4 or 5 miles,
and appear in a broken escarpment on its eastern face. It is the out
crop of those light colored beds capped by an interbedded sheet of ba-
salt, which forms such a conspicuous feature in the face of the ridge as
seen from North Yakima. A section of the rocks there exposed is as
follows:
Feet.
Basalt, scoriaceous, and slaty below, columnar above
40
(Conglomerate of well-worn pebbles..
10-15
Clay, soft, light colored, sandy
20
John Day
Sand, light gray, unconsolidated..
6-20
beds.
Clay, fine, light colored, saudy...
60
| Sand, coarse, with water-worn pebbles 8 inches in diameter
40
(Lapilli, yellowish brown ...
30
Basalt, columnar, with horizontal bedding
30
Columbia Basalt, scoriaceons cavities partially filled
50
lava.
Lapilli and scoriaceous basalt; divisious indefinite
190
Basalt, compact, weathering in concentric forms
100
(Basalt, brown, scoriaceous, to Yakima river.
75
The divisions made in this section of the Columbia lava are mostly
arbitrary, as the characteristics mentioned pass one into the other with.
out well-marked bedding. The clearly defined stratification of the ba-
salt, displayed in many other places, is not here well shown. There are
also reasons for suggesting that the scoriaceous basalt at the base of
the section may have been a subsequent intrusion.
The structure of Selah ridge is too complex to be described intelli-
gently without the aid of map and detailed section, but these are not
to be had on account of the lack of an accurate survey. The ridge is
an exception to other similar uplifts in the same region, for the reason
that it changes from a monoclinal ridge at the west, where the dip is
towards the north, to a monoclinal ridge at the east having a gentle
slope to the south. The general form of the ridge is that of a long,
narrow arch, broken at the west end by a fault on the south side, and
by another fault on the north side, for the greater part of its length.
Atanum and Moxee valleys. -Between Yakima and Selah ridges
there is a remarkable valley some.75 or 80 miles long and nowhere
more than 5 or 6 miles wide. It is divided into two drainage areas,
however, by a slight north and south uplift, which crosses it about 18
miles east of Yakima river. The portion of the orogenetic valley situ-


RUSSELL.1
ARTESIAN WELLS IN MOXEE VALLEY.
55
ated between Yakima river and the divide just mentioned is known
as Moxee valley. The portion west of the Yakima, in which Yakima
City and North Yakima are situated, has no special name, but is drained
in large part by Atanum creek. The Yakima river flows froin north
to south across the basin and has cut deep notches in its bordering
ridges. The basin is floored with John Day beds, which, together with
the thin sheet of basalt interstratified with them, are bent upward
along its borders so as to form a long, narrow basin.
In the western part of the basin the John Day beds may be traced
for 8 or 10 miles west of Yakima river; they then give place, with but
slight change in the topography, to basalt, which forms a plateau
rising gradually to the west, and merging with the hills separating the
two main branches of Atanum creek.
The Atanum-Moxee basin owes its existence to the upheaval of its
border. It is formed of Columbia basalt on which rest layers of John
Day beds, and thin but widely spread lava sheets, which are inter
stratified with the lake beds. The effects of erosion during and sub-
sequent to the upheaval of the side of the basin has resulted not only
in cutting the deep notches in the bordering ridge, through which the
Yakima flows, but has also removed several hundred feet of lake beds
from the portion of the valley adjacent to the river. From the top of
the bordering ridges a large part and in many places all of the John Day
beds, which were originally more than a thousand feet thick, have been
carried away.
'The valley as we now find it is thus the result of the upheaval of
the rocks about its border so as to form a basin, and the erosion of the
deformed surface so as to leave the hard layers in bold relief. The
basin was not robbed of all of its soft beds, as occurred in some of the
neighboring valleys, but as shown by borings that have been made,
nearly a thousand feet in vertical thickness still remain. It is in the
more porous of these beds, composed principally of sand, that artesian
water has been found.
The successful wells are located from 10 to 12 miles east of North
Yakima. These, as well as other wells, which do not flow, are described
below. The greater part of our information concerning them has been
kindly contributed by the Yakima Land Company, which has conducted
most of the drilling. In this connection I am especially indebted to
Mr. H. B. Scudder, manager of the company, and to Mr. Fred. Read
and Mr. Samuel Storrow, for the information here presented.
The first well drilled by the Yakima Land Company was put down
in July and August, 1891, and was the pioneer well in Yakima county.
The attempt to obtain artesian water on Horseheaven plateau was
begun earlier, but is not yet successful.
Well No. 1, of the Yakima Land Company, is in Sec. 3, R. 20, T. 12.
The elevation of the surface at the well is, by aneroid readings, 166
feet above the railroad at North Yakima, or 1,166 feet above the sea.
Diameter of well, 6 inches. Flow of water, two-thirds of a cubic foot


56
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
per second. In an open tube the water rose 26 feet above the surface,
or to 1,192 feet above sea level, when well No. 3, 300 feet distant, was
closed. Temperature of the water, 750 F. The water is clear and
sparkling, but has a slight odor of sulphuretted hydrogen. The sec-
tion passed through is as follows:
Gravel...
Sand, cemented
Clay, hard, blue
Clay, green, compact
Gravel.
Basalt
Sandstone
Basalt
Sandstone
Clay, blue ...
Sand, basaltic
Sand, gray, gneissic
Clay.
Sand and sandstone.
Clay and shale.
Sand and sandstone.
Feet.
12
2
28
19
1
13
3
16
4
2
10
100
1
39
6
58
Depth ...
.... 314
Well No. 2, drilled by the Yakima Land Company, iu Sec. 4, R. 20, T.
12, Las a surface level of 1,206 feet above the sea, as determined by Mr.
Storrow by means of an engineer's level connecting with well No. 1,
the elevation of which is given above. The well has an 8-inch casing.
Water rose to within 11⅓ feet of the surface or to an elevation of 1,194:5
feet above sea level. Temperature and character of water about the
same as in well No. 1. The section passed through is as follows:
Feet.
Gravel.
6
Sand and yellow clay
45
Gravel.
5
Scoriaçeous lava, changing to black basalt
58
Sandstone, metamorphosed..
• ...
Green clay, increasing in hardness toward the bottom
Sandstone ..
Sandstone, micaceous
Sandstone, soft
Sandstone, hard
Sand, loose ...
Sandstone, soft
Clay...
Sand, soft
Pebbles.
Sand ...
Clay, blue .......
Sandstone and sand
Clay.
Basalt.
132
6
18
8
42
16
34
8
60
8
47
5
55
14
66
Depth
618


•
RUSSELL.]
ARTESIAN WELLS IN MOXEE VALLEY.
57
Well No. 3, drilled by the Yakima Land Company, in Sec. 3, R. 20,
T. 12; 300 feet from well No. 1. Elevation of surface, 1,154 feet, and
12 feet below well No. 1. Diameter, 6 inches; flow of water, 1 cubic
foot per second, well No. 1 being open. When well No. 1 was closed
the water in No. 3 rose in an open tube 34:5 feet above the surface, or
to 1,188•5 above sea level. Temperature and character of water the
same as in well No. 1. The record of the section passed through has
been lost.
Well No. 4, drilled by the Yakima Land Company, is in Sec. 4, R. 20,
T. 12. Elevation of surface 1,266 feet; water rose to within 80 feet of
surface, or to 1,186 above sea level. Temperature and character of
water about the same as in well No. 1. Section passed through:
Feet
Gravel and boulders
30
Clay.
30
Basalt
62
Clay, blue
12
Basalt.
62
Sand and sandstone
100
Clay, blue
17
Clay, yellow
19
Sandstone, soft, blue. water-bearing
14
Clay, blue.
18
Sandstone, soft water-bearing
43
Gravel.
6
Sand and gravel
27
Clay, blue
46
Basalt .....
54
Clay, greenish blue
3
Basalt, containing pockets of mud with charcoal..
40.
Depth
583
Well No. 5, drilled by the Yakima Land Company, in Sec. 25, R. 19,
T. 13, is now in progress (August 1, 1892).
Well No. 1, drilled by the Washington Irrigation Company, is in Sec.
31, R. 20, T. 13; elevation of surface 1,085 feet. Flow of water by
estimates, + cubic foot per second. Temperature 730. The well is
without casing; the flow is probably retarded and the temperature de-
creased on this account. The drilling was done with a rotary drill,
through which water was forced from the surface. The section kindly
furnished by Mr. W. T. Clarke, who had charge of the work, is as
follows:
Soil with boulders.
Soft sand and clay.
Basalt, (8) soft and hard.
Soft sand and clay
Feet.
20
356
70
140
886 "
Two wells have been drilled west of North Yakima in what is known
as Wide hollow. The first is on land bonging so P. S. Wood, in Sec.


58
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. (BULL. 108.
22, R. -; T. 22 (%). Depth 256 feet, entireiy in soft strata; basalt not
reached. The well ended in sand from which water rose 6 feet. The
second well is on land belonging to Mr. John Miller, in Sec. 28, R. 18, 1.
13: elevation 1,125 feet. A hole about 630 feet deep was drilled through
soft sand and clay in which water was reached at 80 feet below sur-
face, but does not appear to have been under pressure. Basalt was
not met with.
The pressure under which the water rises in each of the wells in
Moxee valley indicates that it is derived from the same stratum. The
rise of the water is limited by a plain, having an elevation of about
1.190 feet above the sea and 190 feet above the railroad track at the
station at North Yakima. If the water is supplied by precipitation on
the upturned edges of the porous strata, in the way that artesian wells
are commonly fed, we should look for its source in the adjacent ridges,
more especially the ridge to the north, where the strata outcrops sev.
eral hundred feet above the wells; but the rainfall in that section is
so small, probably not exceeding 5 or 6 inches per year, and 'is dis-
tributed over such a wide interval that a very large per cent is lost by
evaporation. The only possible conclusion seems to be that precipita-
tion on the outcropping edges of the porous beds is entirely inadequate
as a source of supply for the wells in the valley below. It may be sur-
mised that the water-bearing strata have been charged for a long time
and that the present flow is from a reservoir which is not being re-
plenished, but the constancy with which the pressure has been main.
tained in wells Nos. 1 and 3, which have been flowing for several
months, does not favor this supposition.
The hypothesis that first occurred to me on entering the Moxee basin
was that the water-bearing strata extend westward and outcrop in the
elevated region closing the valley in the vicinity of Tampico. An exam-
ination of the western part of the valley, however, showed that basalt
forms its bottom from a line beginning about 8 miles west of North
Yakima and extending to the hills closing the depression at the west.
The limit of the John Day beds in that direction, approximately shown
on Pl. I, is below the 1,200-foot contour, and besides, as is indicated
by the depth of lake beds in the wells drilled by Wood and Miller, they
end abruptly against an escarpment of basalt. The waterflowing from
the wells in Moxee valley could not therefore have been derived from
the mountains to the west, and besides the notches cut in the edges of
the basin of Yakima river are 200 feet below the plain to which the
artesian water rises and would afford a means of escape if the under-
ground water came from the west, unless, as seems quite possible, the
upturning of the strata rendered them impervious.
The problem is still further complicated by the fact that there is a
north and south fault of considerable magnitude where the Yakima
river has cut across Selah ridge. How far this fault extends into the
valley can not be told, as the soft beds flooring the basin do not reveal


RUSSELL.]
SOURCE OF WATER IN MOXEE VALLEY.
59
its presence. The region is one of great and by no means regular dis.
turbance, and an extension of the break referred to, clear across the
valley to Union gap, would not seem at all improbable, but there is no
proof of such extension in hand. Moxee valley is far from being a typ-
ical artesian basin; it is rather an accidental basin due to several irreg-
ular uplifts and faults. Neither is its water supply, as already stated,
derived from precipitation on the outeropping edges of the porous strata,
as is the case in what may be considered a normal artesian basin. On
the north side of the valley there are several small fissure springs, sit-
uated a thousand feet above the bottom of the basin. These rise
from a deep source through fissures and have no connection with the
water-bearing strata in the valley, unless it is that they contribute a
small amount of water to the outcropping edges of the porous layers,
but the amount they supplied is certainly trifling.
The temperature of the water in the wells is 750 F. This is consid-
erably higher than would be expected for their depth, and indicates
that the water comes from a deep source, or perhaps that the basalt
beneath the valley has not yet cooled down to the normal subsurface
temperature. As the basalt in Yakima ridge from 1 to 3 miles south of
the artesian wells has been injected into the John Day beds since
they were laid down the presence of basalt beneath the valley yet retain-
ing its original heat is not a violent supposition.
After trying many hypotheses to account for the flow of water in
the Moxee wells, and finding them widely at variance with the facts, I
have been led to assume that the basin is supplied from below by water
rising through fissures or from the leakage upward of a lower artesian
basin. Support is found for this hypothesis in the temperature of the
water and in the absence of any adequate surface supply; in addition,
we have the structure of the basin next south and of Selah valley next
north of Moxee valley to assist us in this supposition.
In the Yakima valley to the south, as already described, there is a
fault in the bottom of the basin, which has formed a short but sharply
uplifted ridge, known as Snipes mountain. This has been produced by
the upheaval of one and is part of both sides of a fissure which must
be of great depth, but does not reach water-bearing strata or connect
with fissures carrying water. The breach occurred after the John Day
beds were deposited, and is a part of the irregular fracturing and tilting
to which the rocks throughout the whole of Yakima county have been
subjected. Again, in Selah valley, the counterpart of Moxee valley in
many ways, but in which the John Day beds have been mostly removed,
there is a fault running with the larger axis of the trough. In this case
also a long ridge was upheaved, as will be described later. Along
the line of this break, farther east than the prominent fault scarp, there
are large fissure springs. There several facts lend support to the
hypothesis that there is a break in the basaltic rocks beneath the porous
John Day beds occupying Moxee valley, and that water rising through


60
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. (BULL. 108.
the break has sufficient pressure to charge the beds above up to a
horizon of about 1,190 feet. The irregular depth at which the water•
bearing beds were reached is perhaps explained, in part, on this sup
position; but may also be due in part to the inclination of the axis of the
trough. The irregularity of the basin is also shown by the want of cor-
respondence in the records of the wells, no two of which agree even in
the more prominent features of the sections.
The subsurface water met with in Moree valley, not only in the wells
already referred to, but in several small wells in Section 8, T. 12, R. 20,
is to be accounted for by the leakage of the artesian basin beneath.
The extent of the Moree artesian basin can be determined in part by
tracing the 1,190-foot contour. The east rim of the valley is precipitous,
however, and its structure irregular, owing to volcanic injectious from
beneath. Just how wear the eastern wall, on which the 1,190-foot con-
tour falls, it will be expedient to sink wells will have to be determined
by experiment. The irregularities in the character of the basin also
render it impracticable to draw the western limit at which flowing water
can be obtained. There is no promise that wells to the west of Yakima
city would be successful, but there is little positive information
concerning that portion of the valley on which to base judgment.
The quantity of water to be derived from flowing wells in Moxee valley
can not be stated, but will have to be determined by experiment. It
can not be considered as inexhaustible, and in fact must be small, judg-
ing from a knowledge of the outflow of fissure springs in general
throughout central Washington. The strictest economy should be
practiced in using the water and all waste prohibited, or else only the
lowest well in the basin will be assured of commercial success.
Selal valley.-North of Selah ridge there is another remarkable east
and west depression bounded by bold ridges, which extend from high
lands on the west drained by Cowiche creek eastward to the Columbia,
a distance of about 75 miles. Its width is seldom over 4 miles and
averages perhaps 3 miles. This long narrow valley, for which no gen-
eral name is recognized, is divided into several minor portions. About
20 miles east of where the Yakima crosses it there is a low divide, due
to the same gentle north and south axis of elevation that determines
the eastern end of Moxee valley; between this divide and Yakima river,
the depression is known as Selah valley.
The abrupt north and south borders of Selah valley are the upturned
edges of tilted blocks. The valley itself occupies the depressed border
of one of these long narrow fragments into which the surface beds have
been divided by profound fractures. The ridge on the south presents
its broken scarp to Selah valley and slopes gently southward, in con-
formity with the dip of the strata which pass under Moxee valley; the
ridge to the north of Selah valley presents its broken scarp to the north,
while the strata slope south and pass beneath the valley itself. The
rocks forming these ridges are Columbia lava, and in the deep trough


RUBSBLL.]
•
FAULT IN SELAE VALLEY.
61
between them nearly all traces of John Day beds have been removed.
Selah valley is the counterpart of Moxee valley in its structure, but its
drainage has been more perfect and the soft beds, corresponding with
the thousand feet of clay and sand in Moxee valley, have been carried
away. The practical absence of John Day beds in Selah valley answers
in the negative the question of the possibility of finding artesian water
there. The Columbia lava beneath Selah valley carries thin beds of inter-
stratified clays and sand and also irregular layers of volcanic lapilli,
but drilling into this material in hopes that some of the porous layers
may carry water is too uncertain and too expensive to warrant a trial.
Besides the absence of porous beds in the valley, the fact that it is arid
and has no connection with the humid region to the west, afford still
further reasons for considering it impossible to obtain artesian water
within its borders.
In that part of Selah valley where the Moxee and Ellensburg road
crosses it there is a fault in the bottom of the basin running east and
west, parallel with the larger axis of the depression. This fault has
produced a ridge about 100 feet high, which presents its steeper escarp.
ment to the south. The ridge is of basalt, but on its gentle northern
slope lake beds belonging to the John Day system are exposed, and may
be traced far up the north border of the valley. The fault in the bot-
tom of the trough is about 5 miles long, and at the east end the scarp
of' basalt connected with it passes beneath lake beds which form a low
anticline. The passage of a fault in the Columbia lava into an arch
in the soft beds resting on it, to be seen at the extremities of many of
the great faults in Yakima county, is here illustrated on a small scale.
At the west end of the break the lake beds have been removed and
expose a gentle upraising of the Columbia lava in the form of an anti-
cline, which has broken open along the larger axis, so as to direct the
course of Selah creek, which has widened the break and cut out a deep
canyon leading west to Yakima river. In the walls of this gorge the
edges of the upper layer of the Columbia lava are exposed, together
with so much of the John Day beds as lie beneath the widely spread
interstratified sheet of basalt, which has already been mentioned many
times. Selah valley ends on the west at Yakima river, but the same
geographic depression continues westward and is known in part as
Wenas valley aud in part as Naches valley. The nomenclature that
has been fastened on the country is widely at variance with the geo
logic structure as well as with the topographic relief, a fact which
makes the task of describing the country difficult.
Wenas and Naches valleys.-Wenas valley is floored by John Day
beds from Yakima river for about 12 miles northwest. These beds,
together with the underlying basalt, are bent upward along its north-
ern and western margin. Near the mouth of Wenas creek and
along the Yakima the interstratified basalt near the base of the John
Day beds is exposed.
Between Wenas and Naches valleys there is


62
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
•
an irregular plateau, the surface of which is in general 800 feet above
either valley. The material forming this plateau is fine sandy clay,
volcanic lapilli, and coarse conglomerate, arranged in strata that are
essentially horizontal, but slope abruptly upward at the east, where
they ascend and cover the west slope of the portion of the Selah ridge
lying between the Naches and Yakima rivers. At the north the beds
are also sharply upturned, as may be seen at the south end of Yakima
canyon, through which the Yakima enters Selah-Wenas valley.
Along the western outcrop the vertical edges of beds of conglomerate
stand as a wall along the east side of the bold mountain mass, 455
feet high, which separates Wenas creek from the Naches river. The
wall of conglomerate owes its presence to the weathering of vertical
strata, and is situated from 1,800 to 1,900 feet above the continuation of
the same beds between Wenas creek and Naches river, where they
are horizontal. This is one of many striking examples of the great
disturbances that have affected all of the region treated in this paper
since the John Day beds were spread out.
The beds exposed in the borders of the plateau between Wenas
and Naches valley vary considerably in differeht localities, but their
pervading character is shown by the following section taken on the
west side of the uplands in the highest portion. The section shows a
general absence of fine clay and fine volcanic dust such as is found
in abundance in the outerops of the same system in. White bluffs,
on the Columbia, but certain beds of conglomerate and layers of coarse
angular lapilli. Volcanic dust in layers several feet thick is exposed
near the bottom of the escarpment, adjacent to where the following
section was taken. The basalt at the base of the section in either the
topmost layer of the Columbia lava or an interstratified sheet near the
base of the John Day bed is brought up by a gentle anticline running
east and west through the center of the plateau.
The thicknesses
given below are from eye estimates, checked by aneroid readings:
Feet.
Blown sand at top of section...
• 10-20
Sand, with coarse gravel near the top.
125
Sandstone and lapilli, with clay seams
30
Sandstone, compact, with pebbles 8 inches in diameter, forming a
vertical scarp...
Pebble, stained black on the surface.
Sand, soft, unconsolidated.
Sandstone, compact, with lapill
Pebbles, with some sand
Lapilli, compact..
Pebbles of white punice.
Clay, gray, sandy..
Sandstone, drab, with pebbles of pumice..
Clay, sandy..
Sandstone, soft, light yellow
Sandstone, soft, gray..
Clay, very fine, weathering white.
20
10
90
3
4
3
2
14
5
10
4
16
20


RUSSELL.
TYPICAL SECTION OF JOHN DAY BEDS.
63
Pebbles, with some sand, dark.
Sandstone, soft, with thin, hard layers
Lapilli, with layers of pumice pebbles
Sand, unconsolidated...
Sandstone, friable, with pebbles
Conglomerate of pumice pebbles, usually forming a cliff
Clay, fine, gray...
Sandstone, yellowish, coarse, friable.
Clay, gray, thin bedded..
Clay, reddish, thin bedded.
Sandstone, gray, cross bedded.
Unexposed, soft sandstone (9)
Basalt to level of Naches river
Feet.
20
80
18
60
14
1
1
2
8
3
fO
40
60
Depth.
765
These beds are sometimes considered as affording indications of the
presence of coal, and in fact portions of the region wich they occupy
have been sold for " coal lands." The exposures are abundant, how.
ever, and although they contain thin and very local layers of poor lig
nite the evidence against their containing layers of coal or even of lig.
nite of any commercial value is abundant and positive.
The surface of the plateau is covered with bunch grass, and affords
good pasture, and many inquiries have been made concerning the prob.
abilities of obtaining water for irrigation by means of artesian wells.
This question is answered by the deep erosion of Wenas creek and
Naches river, which have cut the lake beds to the bottom so as to ex-
pose the Columbia lava, proving conclusively that wells drilled with
the hope of obtaining flowing water would be a failure. Abundant rea-
sons might be given for concluding that artesian water can not be had
anywhere in the region drained by Wenas creek or Naches river. The
rocks are there mainly basalt, which has been upturned and broken
in such a violent manner, and is also so deeply eroded, that, did the
character of the rock favor the presence of water-bearing strata, the
position in which the beds lie and the manner in which they have
been broken would exclude the hope of their forwing artesian basins.
Both Wenas creek aud Naches river, after entering the basin in
which stands the plateau of John Day beds described above, widen
their valleys on account of the ease with which the lake beds were
eroded, and become sufficiently broad to be of agricultural importance.
Their upper courses are in narrow, steep-sided canyon-like valleys,
eroded in an elevated region of basalt rock, from which, so far as known,
every trace of the John Day beds which once covered it have been car-
ried away, excepting in the upper portion of Wenas valley, where a
few remnants of sandstone are reported. The valley of the Naches is
especially remarkable for its wild scenery, and the Tiaton, which joius
it from the west, just before the valley broadens, flows through some of
the most attractive scenery that Yakima county can furnish.


64
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BOLL. 108.
On the right bank of the Naches, between the Tiaton and where
Coweche creek joins it, there is a plateau with a rough, hummocky
surface, which is exceptional, both topographically aud geologically, to
anything seen elsewhere during our reconnaissance. The plateau was
formed by a recent lava flow which welled out as a flood of molten
rock, somewhere in the elevated region drained by Tiaton creek, and,
following a previously eroded valley, flowed east to where the Tiaton
now joins the Naches and then turned abruptly southward and flowed
on for 12 miles, to where the Cowiche now unites with the Naches. The
lava stream broadened as it progressed until its lower part is nearly
2 miles wide. It followed previous lines of drainage and displaced
both Tiaton creek and the Naches river, causing them to erode new
channels along its border. The course of Cowiche creek was also
changed and thrown to the south of its former position.
The flood of molten rock which produced this change was from 300
to 500 feet thick, as is revealed in its abrupt border overlooking the
Naches. A mile above where. the Cowiche joins the Naches the old
surface of Columbia.basalt, over which the lava flowed, is exposed.
'The rock, on cooling, assumed a columnar structure, which is much
confused in places, owing to its hardening about various centers, as is
well shown along the road between the Cowiche and the Naches, at
what is sometimes called "Pictured rocks." Other examples of the
columnar structure may be seen all about the margins of the plateau,
especially near the summit of its bounding cliff's. The borders of the
original sheet have been out away by the streams skirting it, thus
indicating that they are striving to regain their ancient channels, which
lie deeply buried beneath the resistant lava.
The rock forming this flow is black ad solid, but has crystals of
feldspar scattered through it, which appear as white rectangular
figures on freshly broken surfaces. Samples of the rock have been
studied microscopically by J. S. Diller, who pronounces it, an andesite;
as it contains crystals of the mineral known as hypersthene, it is
termed a hypersthene andesite. Mr. Diller's description of this inter-
esting rock is as follows:
The lava of the recent flow wear Naches bridge is dark colored, varying from dark
gray to pitch black. The lighter colored portions are full of steam holes, while the
darkest are dense. All portions, so far as may be jndged from specimens collected,
contain a multitude of small but distinct crystals of feldspar and pyroxene, which
render the rock decidedly porphyritic. The long, narrow crystals of feldspar are
clearly ontlined and striated in a way that is characteristic of the plagioclase group.
Crystals of greenish pyroxene are less abundant, especially in the darker portions
of the mass.
In the small steam holes of the vesicular portion of the lava there are minute
crystals of some zeolite, but they were too small for closer determination.
The ground mass of the rock, which is every where dark colored, is composed chiefly
of a dark-brown glassy base, which under the microscope is seen to contain swarms
of feldspar and pyroxene microlites of a later generation than the large crystals
which render the rock porphyritic.


ROSSELL.]
LAVA AT NACHES BRIDGE.
65
'The pyroxeno is strongly pleochroic and has the form and extinction characteris-
tic of hypersthene. No other pyroxene than hypersthene was observed, nor could
any olivine or quartz be found. The rock is a good example of hypersthene ande-
site.
This is somewhat surprising when wo remember that it is the youngest lava of
that region, and, inn geological sense, of recent eruption. At most other points on
the slope and border of the Cascade range the youngest lavas are basalts.
The eruption of this stream of molten rock was among the very latest
episodes in the varied history of Yakima county. Itoccurred after the
general breaking and upturning which followed the deposition of the
John Day beds, and after weathering and erosion had cut away these soft
strata from all of the more prominent ridges and, to a great measure,
reduced the valleys to the lowest level at which material could be re-
moved from them. The country was channeled by streams in the same
manner as at the present day, and one of these drainage lines, prob.
ably forming as fair a valley as that through which the Naches now
meanders, was overwhelmed and filled by the fiery flood. The surface
of the flow presents peculiar topographic forms, especially near its
lower end, where there are scores of irregular hummocks and piles of
scoriaceous rock 30 or 40 feet high, with irregular, undrained basins
between. Farther north, just between the junction of the Tiaton and
Naches, the surface is more even and is covered with grass. The soil
formed by the decay of the andesite is a fine, dark-brown earth, which
with irrigation would furnish rich agricultural land.
The Naches, for a score of iniles at least above the mouth of Tiaton
creek, flows through a deep canyon, bounded on the east by the pre.
cipitous face of a long, uplifted mountain mass having the topo-
graphic form of a great fault scarp, in which the inclination of the
strata is northeastward. The country about the upper portion of the
Naches was only seen from a distance, however, and may have a more
complete structure than is here suggested.
Our line of march led up Wenas creek to the divide overlooking
Ellensburg; we then turned back and, after revisiting Moxee valley, pro-
ceeded to Kittitas valley by the wagon road on the east side of Yakima
canyon.
Yakima canyon. The rocks on the head waters of Wenas creek are
Columbia lava, broken and upturned in fault scarps, which merge into
a general region of uplifts to the west, but become separated and well
defined in traversing the desert country to the east. The ridges thus
found agree in their principal features with nearly all the east aud west
ridges in Yakima and Kittitas counties. One of the lines of east and
west faulting between Wenas and Kittitas valleys is marked by Ump-
tanum ridge, which presents its bold escarpment to the northward.
North of this, again, are the Beavertail hills, which are also a monoclinal
uplift.
Yakima river on leaving Kittitas valley flows at right angles to the
trend of these lines of uplift, and has cut a picturesque canyon 15 miles
Bull. 108
-5


66
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
long and from 1,000 to 1,800 feet deep directly across them. A view
of the northern end of this canyon, looking upstream to Kittitas valley,
is presented on Plate vIl and will serve to show the narrow, trench-like
character of the excavation. The absence of a flood plain along the
stream indicates the incompleteness of the task that the river has un.
dertaken.
Umptanum ridge.-East of Yakima canyon this ridge is continued
toward the southeast and becomes more and more clearly defined until
it reaches Priests rapids. Its monoclinal structure is well marked,
especially near its eastern terminus, where the base of its precipitous
northern face is washed by the Columbia. As previously mentioned,
the ridge disappears at the east in the plain bounding the Columbia,
but rises again a few miles to the east and forms isolated ridges which
stand like islands in the desert. These lost mountains have been
called the Gable hills.
The country north of Umptanum ridge to Beavertail hills and to
Saddle mountain, west of the Columbia, is a rocky region in which the
black basalt is scarcely concealed from sight by the sandy soil. This
region is drained by Squaw and Burnt creeks, flowing west to the
Yakima, and by Alkali and Hunson creeks, flowing east to the Colum
bia. It has been deeply trenched by these streams, although they are
now dry the greater part of the year. The creeks near their mouths
flow in canyons several hundred feet deep. The land is much too rough
to be irrigated from surface streams, and artesian water is not to be
thought of. With the exception of a strip of rich land about a quarter
of a mile broad, in the bottom of Squaw creek canyon, near its mouth,
the country is valueless for agriculture, but bunch grass grows luxuri-
antly among the rocks and affords good pasturage. In the spring lovely
wild flowers deck the sides of the canyons and the rocky plateau above
in such profusion as to change the somber tone of the landscape and
render it less forbidding.
The prevailing rocks are basalt, yet, in looking down the deeply dis-
sected region from elevated summits on its borders, one can trace light-
colored bands along the winding canyon walls, made by thin sheets of
lake beds interstratified with the volcanic rock. In places on the inter-
spaces between the branches of' the streams one may see remnants of
the heavy deposit of John Day beds which once covered the entire
region.
In threading one's way across this dreary valley, fragments of fossil
wood and even large parts of tree trunks, now changed to stone, fre-
quently attract the attention and show that in former ages the now
desolate regior was forest covered.
Our reconnoissance embraced practically the whole of the basin
drained by Wenas creek, but did not extend up the Naches river be.
yond the mouth of Tiaton creek. All of the rugged and highly pictur-
esque western border of Yakima county was left unexplored. For a


U. 8. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
BULLETIN NO. 108 PL. VII
YAKIMA CANYON, LOOKING TOWARD KITTITAS VALLEY.


RUSSELL.]
DIKES BENEATH COLUMBIA LAVA.
67
long distance up both the Naches and Tiaton valleys the rocks are
mainly basaltic, and stand in bold cliffs, leaving but little room for
flood plains. How far to the west the basalt may occur is not known,
but the presence of coal-bearing rocks at Cowlitz pass, and also the
occurrence of deeply excavated valleys of which the Tiaton basin is an
example, suggests that the basalt is limited on the west by a region in
which erosion has been sufficient to remove the basalt and lav bare a
lower series of rocks. Possibly the Kittitas system, which forms the
surface in the western part of Kittitas county, will be found to extend
southward through Yakima county.
KITTITAS COUNTY.
Only a small portion of Kittitas county has been geologically exam-
ined, and nothing like an adequate account of the history of its rocks
or of the origin of its diversified and attractive scenery can be given.
In the eastern portion of the county the rocks are Columbia basalt
with remnants of John Day beds in the vallevs. The lava forms con-
spicuous cliffs along the Columbia to within 5 or 6 miles of We-
natchee, the cliffs then turn abruptly southwest and are prolonged in
a bold escarpment facing west, which determines the eastern limits of
Schwak creek drainage, and is cut through by the Yakima a mile or
two below Teanaway. South of Yakima river the basaltic escarpment
continues southwest for many miles, but has not been definitely traced.
West of the western limit of the Columbia lava, between Columbia
and Yakima rivers, there is a rolling, forest-covered, hilly country,
which has been deeply dissected by stream erosion and shows, by its
topographic forms, that it differs in nearly every way from the region
of basaltic rocks to the cast. In the rugged country referred to, drained
by Schwak creek and Teanaway river, the surface rocks are sandstone
and shale, with coal seams in certain localities. Coal has also been dis-
covered in thin seams in the neighborhood of Wenache, and pro.
visionally the formations in these two areas will be included in one
system which, for convenience, is called the "Kittitas system;" a
portion of its eastern boundary is shown on the map forming Plate II.
The rocks of the Kittitas system adjacent to the base of the bold
escarpment of Columbia lava, between Columbia and Yakima rivers, is
now exposed at the surface, because the basalt which formerly covered
it has been eroded away. The strata are penetrated by an extensive
system of dikes of hard basaltic rock, which accounts for many of the
features in the relief of the land. These are of special interest because
they seem to have been the source of the great sheet of basalt which
once covered this. portion of the Kittitas system. In places beneath
the escarpment formed by the western edge of the Columbia lava there
are large dikes which lead up to the basalt and merge with it. Their
immediate junction with the lava crowning the cliffs was not closely


68
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
examined, but the dikes in the slope below have every appearance of
being connected with it, and lend support to the hypothesis of fissure
eruptions to account for the great flood of basalt covering such a large
part of the northwesterm states. The dikes referred to were formed
by the filling of vertical fissures in the sandstone and shale of the
Kittitas system, with molten rock injected from below. The intruded
material has changed the strata through which it passed, and on cool-
•ing formed compact basalt similar to the Columbia lava, but not porous
or scoriaceous, as is sometimes the case in the surface flow.
In the gravels of Schwak creek there is considerable placer mining.
The gold obtained is coarse and has been traced to large auriferous
quartz ledges near the head of the stream. This region was examined
by Mr. Diller, who informs me that the Kittitas system extends up the
Schwak creek road to within 14 miles of the summit, where they are
replaced by the older rocks in which the Pechastin mines are located.
Kittitas Valley.-Like the valleys farther sonth in Yakima county,
already briefly described, this broad basin owes its existence to the
upheaval of the rim of basalt which surrounds it. The John Day beds,
between 700 and 800 feet thick, flooring its bottom, have been pre.
served, owing to their depression below the level at which the drain-
age of the valley escapes at the head of Yakima canyon. The soft
beds still partially filling the basin are easily eroded, but the depth
to which they can be cut by streams is controlled by the horizon of
the bottom of the notch in the rim of the basin through which the
drainage escapes. The river is still at work deepening the outlet of
the valley, and various stages in the task of removing the soft beds
from within it are recorded by numerous terraces about its borders.
This is a plain example, on a small scale, of the wide-reaching law of
" base level erosion," first emphasized by Powell, which has an almost
universal bearing on the action of streams, and on the origin and de-
velopment of topographie forms. The base level, to which the surface
of the entire continent and of all land surfaces is being reduced, is
sea level.
Kittitas valley is approximately 18 miles long from north to south
and 10 to 12 miles broad. Its area is in the neighborhood of 150 square
miles. Yakima river flows through it from north to south and receives
the drainage of several creeks which rise on its mountainous borders.
The rocks forming the rim of the basin, as already stated, are Columbia
lava, upraised sometimes along fault lines, but more frequently, in a
broad, general way, without clearly revealing the structure that has been
impressed upon it. The borders of the basin to the east and west are
between 5,000 and 6,000 feet in altitude, and the general level of the
bottom of the basin is but 1,500 feet. The streams draining the elevated
rim have cut canyons many hundred feet deep through the solid basalt,
but the same streams on emerging into the valley flow over the surface
of the soft lake beds without forming channels. Instead of cutting


RUSSELL.
SANDERS WELL NEAR ELLENSBURG.
69
they are depositing the material derived from the hard rocks on their
upper courses; this is because in the valley they have reached a base
level and can not cut deeper.
The soft John Day beds flooring the valley do not extend far up its
sides, as is the case in many similar basins farther east, but usually
end abruptly against the base of the bordering slopes. At a few local.
ities, however, to the southeast of Ellensburg, there are small outcrops
of sandstone and conglomerate at an elevation of 200 or 300 feet on the
side of the basin, and again at the south end of the valley fine marly
clay is exposed on the side of the Beavertail hills.
The layer of basalt interstratified with the lower beds of the John Day
system in Moxee and Wenas valleys occurs again beneath Kittitas
valley and outcrops in the surrounding hills, but is much thicker than
farther south and has only a thin sheet of sandstone beneath it. It is
with difficulty that the layer of sediment beneath the first lava sheet
can be recognized, yet in a few localities it is plainly exposed. Just
within the mouth of Nanum canyon, about 12 miles north of Ellensburg,
there is a heavy ridge of basalt following the geueral course of the bor-
der of the plain below and presenting a bold cliff 200 or 300 feet high
to the north. In a narrow depression at the base of this cliff there are
occasional exposures of an interbedded laver of sandstone. Farther
up Nanum creek there are other obscure exposures of sandstone and
shale, showing that the layers of basalt forming the picturesque high-
lands of that region have occasionally thin layers of sedimeutary rock
between them.
The soft porous beds underlying Kittitas valley do not now extend
far enough up the border of the basin to furnish an artesian head for
wells in the valley, but their eroded borders are upturned to some
extent on nearly all sides and the basin is without outlet except through
Yakima canyon. For these reasons the prospect of obtaining artesian
water in the valley, although not promising, would seem sufficient to
warrant the drilling of an experimental well. This has been done by
Mr. Charles A. Sanders at a locality about 2 miles northwest of
Ellensburg, in Sec. 30, R. 19, T. 18. A well was there drilled which
passed through clay with layers of cemented sand and reached com-
pact basalt at a depth of about 700 feet. Water was reached at a depth
of 80 feet and when the well was abandoned stood 40 feet below the sur-
face. Although flowing water was not obtained, the well is of value,
as it demonstrates that the water beneath Kittitas valley does not
exist under sufficient pressure to force it to the surface, and reuders
further experiment useless. Sander's well ends at the surface of the
Columbia lava. By sinking it some two or three hundred feet deeper
the first thin laver of sandstone interbedded with the basalt would be
reached, but there is small hope that it would be water bearing. The
heavy layer of molten rock spread out above the sandstone has changed
its structure, and even if sufficiently porous its small thickness and


70
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. BULL. 108.
the manner in which it outcrops do not favor the hope that it would
carry sufficient water to make it of economic importance.
Fortunately Kittitas valley is so situated in reference to the Yakima
river and to the creeks that flow down its mountainous borders that
nearly every acre of agricultural land in its bottom can be irrigated.
The canyons in the sides of the basin afford good sites for storage
reservoirs; and the creeks flowing through them carry sufficient water,
if properly stored, to irrigate all of the land in the valley without draw:
ing on Yakima river,
In exposures of the John Day beds having a vertical thickness of
about 200 feet, along the left bank of Yakima river in Kittitas valley,
the beds are seen to be mostly white volcanic lapilli with two strata of
sandstone 6 to 8 feet thick, composed largely of well-rounded pebhles,
from 5 to 8 inches in diameter.
At the south end of the valley, about a mile north of the entrance
to Yakima canyon, there is a small quarry where a light friable sand-
stone, composed largely of volcanic dust, has been taken out and used
in the front of a bank building in Ellensburg. With the soft sandstone
there are thin beds of well-worn gravel and thick layers of exceedingly
fine white clay. Some of the layers of sandstone and much of the clay
are charged abundantly with the impressions of leaves, which have
preserved with the greatest accuracy even the most minute venation
of the ancient foliage. These leaves were blown into Lake John Day
or drifted in by tributary streams and became buried in soft sediments
which have since hardened to sandstone and clay. Sometimes the
leaf impressions have a delicate greenish tint, a remnant of the ancient
chlorophyll, which increases their resemblance to living foliage. A
small collection of these fossils has been examined by Mr. F. H. Know-
ton, of the U. S. Geological Survey. His report concerning them will
be found in the Appendix.
Kittitas valley lies at the east base of the moderately elevated and
quite humid region bordering the Cascade mountains on the east. Its
bottom is without forests other than those of cottonwood trees which
grow along the immediate banks of the river, but the hills and moun
tains bordering it on the west and north are clothed with an open park.
like growth of pine, hemlock, and spruce. The soil is everywhere rich
and is exceptionally so beneath the forests on the uplands, where the
disintegration and decay of basaltic rocks have produced a fine, dark-
colored deposit, which is usually rather thin, but sometimes has a depth
of several feet. This soil is retentive of moisture and is everywhere
covered with luxuriant bunch grass and flowers. The shaded upland
pastures afford sustenance to thousands of sheep, but their expanse is
so great that their verdure is unimpaired. My visit to this charming
region was in springtime, when the mountain slopes were fresh and
green and were kept free from dust by frequent showers. During the
hot summer the grass becomes dry and withered and the tender green
of spring gives place to the brown and gray of summer and autumn.


RUSSELL. I
ATTRACTIVE SCENERY NEAR ELLENSBURG.
71
The views to be had from the pine-covered heights above Ellens-
burg, especially to the south of the town, are unusually fine even for
a region which abounds in attractive panoramas. From many points
of view one may look out through a framework of rugged trunks and
drooping branches over the broad valley with its shining river mean.
dering through groves of cottonwood and past fruitful farms; beyond
the valley to the north, rise bold foothills covered with dark forests
from base to summit, while still farther away beyond the valley's rim
and beyond indefinite foothills softened in outline by their distance,
rise rugged and angular mountain peaks which reach far above the
limit at which trees can grow, aud retain their wintry covering far
into the summer. These are the Wenache mountains. The highest
of their clustering spires is Mount Steward. Although not nearly as
high as Mount Tacoma, which may be clearly seen to the southwest, it
is far more attractive to the dwellers in Kittitas valley and is a moun-
tain of which any land might be proud. From many points of view
Mount Adams as well as Tacoma and Steward are in sight and also
many lesser peaks and snowy crest lines, all combining to form a picture
on which the eye loves to dwell.
From Ellensburg to Wenache.-From Ellensburg our reconnoissance
led us across the high basaltic table-land bordering Kittitas valley on
the north. We followed a much used freight road and reached the
Columbia nearly opposite the mouth of Moses coulee. Our way lay
across a plateau of Columbia lava which terminates a few miles to
the west in a great escarpment, already noticed, at the foot of which
the rocks of the Kittitas system form the surface. The only rocks
seen during this portion of our journey were basalt. The general level
of the plateau is about 5,000 feet, but near its western border it slopes
upward before breaking off, and is there about 6,000 feet in general
elevation.
In climbing the border of Kittitas valley the views to the south
were varied and extensive, embracing the level floor of the basin about
Ellensburg with vivid green alfalfa fields and more delicately tinted
ground where young wheat grew; beyond were rolling wooded hills
rising in picturesque irregularity to the base of the snow -covered Cas-
*cade mountains.
On the surface of the plateau we were shut in by forests of pine and
spruce trees, beneath which the snow still lingered. The channels cut
in the borders of the upland are fed by branching watercourses which
flow away from the elevated region in conformity with the present
slope of the rocks, showing that their courses have been determined
ly the form which the plateau now has, and are not an inheritance
from an older condition, or from an overlying bed, now washed away.
In other words, the drainage is consequent and the minor topographic
forms are due to the weathering of the present surface.
From a camp beneath a grove of pines on the verge of the steep de-


72
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. (BULL. 108.
scent leading from the forest and grass-covered plateau above, where
winter yet lingered, to the hot, barren desert below, we had a splendid
view of the deep canyon of the Columbia and of the table-land to the east,
which extended bare and desolate as far as the eye could reach. The
pines clothing the plateau we had crossed descend a few hundred feet
down its borders, but are there clustered in small groves and follow the
lines of drainage as if fearful of approaching too near the parched
region below. Beyond the lowest groves the luxuriant mautle of grass
extends far down the slopes, but before reaching the valley loses its
freshness and becomes brown and withered. In the distance, across
the Columbia, there is not a tree in sight, and the vast plain, as it
appears from our elevated station, has the brown and gray tone charac.
.
teristic of the desert. A narrow white line on the desert, extending
eastward with apparently a straight course until it was lost to view,
we know to be the Great Northern railroad in process of construction,
and the clouds of dust rolling away from the fresh embankments make
us wish that the engineer and workmen who were laboring there in the
heat could enjoy with us the freshness and coolness of the mountains.
In the evening the strong side light thrown on the desert made it
glow with a ruddy color, seemingly due to the heat of the surface, and
brought out in startling relief every ridge and canyon in the plateau
surface and each cleft and column in the great wall of basalt which
rises from the river and joins the desert 2,000 feet above. The strange
panorama, thus strongly illuminated when the glare of the day gave
place to the soft radiance of sunset, is a hundred miles in extent from
north to south, and to the east is limitless, aud fades away in the
purple glow of the desert air.
We could see the abrupt rampart formed by Saddle mountain far to
the south, and noted a white horizontal line just below the crest which
is formed by the outcropping edge of a sheet of John Day beds, inter-
stratified with the basalt forming the main mass of the ridge. The
soft, light-colored stratum has been preserved by the sheet of basalt
above it, the broken edge of which now forms the even crest line of the
mountain. We were looking at the bold escarpment of a monoclinal
ridge formed of the broken edges of strata which dip gently away from
us, and form the gentle southern slope of the mountain.
At the base of Saddle mountain we could trace the course of Crab
creek for many miles and see that it is really an abandoned stream
chammel sunken in the basalt. We note, too, that the direction of the
ancient stream which excavated the channel was controlled by the
fault which gave origin to Saddle mountain, North of Crab creek
there is a broad desert surface unscarred by drainage and with but
little detail except in the line of precipices formed by the cutting away
of' the border of the plateau by the Columbia. Tracing the apparently
level plain northward from Crab creek to within about 5 miles of
Moses coulee, the eye detects a gentle rise in the surface which cul


RUSSELL..)
GREAT PLAIN OF THE COLUMBIA.
73
minates in a ridge extending eastward but curving south at its more
distant extremity. This ridge breaks off abruptly on its northern side
and has a line of drainage at the base of its northern slope which leads to
the Columbia. This depression is Wake Cumtux coulee. Its relation to
the small ridge just south of it is the same as the relation of Crab creek
coulee to Saddle mountain. In each instance there has been an east
and west break in the stratified basalt forming the plateau; the south
side of the break in each instance has been upraised so as to form a
long, narrow, monoclinal ridge, and surface drainage directed by the
break at the foot of the steep escarpment of each ridge has carved a deep
camyou or coulee leading to the Columbia. A later chapter in the
history of these coulees is recorded by the fine beds which partially
fill them; these belong to the time when the drainage of the Columbia
was obstructed aud Lake Lewis existed.
Moses coulee is a broad, flat-bottomed canyon which heads in several
branches far back in the plateau. It is the result of stream erosion,
which was initiated by a break in the rocks of the same character as
the fractures that gave direction to Crab creek and Wake Cuntux
coulees. The south wall of the camyon is a precipice of basalt about
500 feet high, from which the strata dip very gently southward. The
northern wall is not so high as the one on the south, and the strata ex-
posed in its face are practically horizontal. The disturbance of the
beds adjacent to the break is so gentle, however, that it would scarcely
be detected except in a distant view when the beds are seen in profile.
The desert surface north of Moses coulee rises gently for some 10
miles to where another east-and-west uplift forms the sky line, as seen
from our camp beneath the pines. In the edge of the plateau a few
miles north of Moses coulee there is a break occupied by a deep drain.
age chanuel, the south wall of which is again higher and has a different
dip than the north wall. The fact that the coulees forming such a
unique and characteristic feature of Douglas county are due to the
erosion of streams which followed lines of fracture and faulting, is oue
of the most interesting portions of the geologic story to be read in a
general view of the region.
The east wall of the canyon of the Columbia, like the walls of the
coulees opening from it, is a series of palisades rising 2,000 feet above
the river. In these great cliffs, unbroken for scores of miles, the edges
of the layers of basalt underlying the plain to the east are exposed and
reveal the fact that the rocks are in distinct layers, many of them being
formed of vertical columns, and ranging from perhaps 50 feet to 200 or
300 feet in thickness. Between some of the layers there are thin, irreg.
ular sheets of volcanic lapilli or of sedimentary layers, but most of the
contacts are marked simply by a line separating rocky layers of differ-
ent structure, and may be the result of cooling. Near the top of the
cliffs, especially above Rock island, there is a band of light-colored lake
bed, perhaps 40 feet thick, which is usually weathered back, and forms


74
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
a terrace. The lower portions of the cliff's are concealed by vast talus
slopes which stand with surface slopes of about 400 and reach half
way up the escarpment. Viewed directly these conical piles of angular
fragments seem perpendicular, and only reveal their true forms when
seen in profile.
The Volumbia from the neighborhood of Lake Chelan southward to
where it passes through the Cascade mountains is a desert stream.
Its banks are without trees and lack the bright green tints that usually
margin rivers and fresh-water lakes. The gray brown of the desert
touches the water's brink, but does not change its character. Sage
brush and greasewood, with other desert vegetation, fringe the banks
in places and have a somewhat more luxuriant growth than farther
away on the deserts, but this is all the change that the river has pro-
duced in the vegetation on its shores. The absence of cotton wood trees
is especially noticeable, since the courses of streams in the avid regions
are frequently marked by them. A few miles below Lake Chelan the
first pine trees are met with in ascending the river, and from there north-
ward they are of common occurrence, although seldom forming dense
growth.
In the canyon of the Columbia above Saddle mountain there are
many terraces. The highest and broadest of these is at the same level
and unites with the flat bottom of the coulees, extending back into the
plateau to the east. It is evident that both the main canyon and the
coulees branching from it have been filled to a level of approximately
700 feet above the Columbia, aud that subsequently the channel of the
river was reexcavated, leaving terraces along its sides, while in the
lateral canyon there has been too little drainage since the period of
filling in to excavate even faint chanels along the ancient water-
courses.
On descending into the canyon of the Columbia, when we continued
our journey to Wenache, we found several stream terraces below the
great terrace, and also many irregular terraces, both at higher and
lower horizons, which are due to landslides. Terraces resulting from
the weathering of the outcropping edges of horizontal sheets of basalt
were also distinguished. In places landslides have reached the river
and partially obstructed its course with huge masses of basalt.
The Columbia lava, which has such an immense development in the
eastern parts of Yakima and Kittitas counties, was found to terminate,
on ascending the Columbia, about 12 miles below Wenache. The
black precipices bordering the river on the west there turn abruptly
southwest, as previously noted, and extend in an irregular line of tower-
ing cliffs across an exceedingly rugged and generally elevated region
to the Yakima river below Teanaway, and then southwest for an un-
known distance. At the west base of this great escarpment, which
rises almost vertically from 1,000 to 1,500 feet, the topography changes
immediately and the broad plateau features give place to drainage lines


RUSSELL.]
TYPOGRAPHY DUE TO LANDSLIDES.
75
inclosing rugged hills. At the immediate base of the great scarp, and
for 2 or 3 miles west of it, the topographic forms are especially irreg.
alar, and the hills and ridges surround basins so as entirely to inclose
them and leave them without outlets.
Near the cliffs the characteristic features produced by landslides are
clearly shown. The irregular ridges are formed of masses of basalt
which have fallen and slid to their present position and have usually
an inclination toward the cliff whence they came. Evidently the
great escarpment is retreating, owing to the breaking away of por-
tions of its face. More distaut from the cliff the secondary ridges
become less pronounced and the surface is strewn with broken masses
of basalt; still farther away the basaltic blocks have mostly disap.
peared, leaving an irregular rolling topography which is dissected by
stream channels and acquires a relief due to deuudation and to the
structure of the rocks beneath. How far west of its present limit the
basalt formerly extended is not possible to determine with accuracy,
but it must have been at least several miles.
From where the escarpment of Columbia lava turns southwest, near
Rock rapids, to the mouth of Wenache river, and thence westward
for at least several miles, the country rocks are sandstones aud shales,
with thin beds of coal, and are supposed to belong to the Kittitas sys.
tem. These rocks are older than the Columbia lava, and at the base of
the escarpment just mentioned pass beneath it. The rocks of the Kit-
titas system were folded and eroded before the Columbia lava was
spread out over them. To the north the lava overlaps their border and
rests on the decayed and eroded surface of granitic rocks.
A few miles south of Wenache there are thin lavers of basalt cay.
ping the hills, which show that the inundation of molten rock in that
region began with the spreading out of a sheet of lava from 20 to 50
feet thick, which was succeeded by sedimentary layers of about the
same thickness, so far as can be judged, and then came the great flood
of molten rock forming the widely spread formation named the Colum-
bia lava.
The Kittitas system occurs on the east side of the Columbia from
Rock rapids some 15 miles up stream. Soft sandstones and shales,
usually flight color, but sometimes brilliant red and yellow and looking
as if they had been baked by the burning of coal seams, form the steep
slope leading from the river opposite Wenache to the base of the
palisade of basalt crowning the heights above. This strip of country
formed of sedimentary rocks is about 3 miles broad, but becomes nar
rower down stream; the rocks also dip eastward and are carried below
the level of the river and disappear beneath the basalt at Rock rapids.
Along the east bank of the Columbia above Wenache the sandstones
and shales give place to quartzites aud schists, which immediatelv an-
derlie the Columbia lava. Farther up the river no traces of the Kit-
titas system have been observed. 'They continue for at least 20 miles


76
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. (BULL. 108.
up the Wenache river, as has been observed by Diller, and then give
place to crystalline rocks.
The coal found near Wenache occurs in thin seams which are
much disturbed and dip at all angles. It is of poor quality and so
far as known is of little economic value. The presence of even thin
seams of coal, however poor, is sufficient to encourage further search,
and the field should not be condemnued until every layer of rock that it
contains is thoroughly known and its value for fuel or other purposes
demonstrated.
Much as we desired to ascend Wenache river and explore the geo-
logically unknown country to the west, which is full of promise to the
geologist, we were constrained to turn to the less inviting arid region
to the east, where the artesian well problem demanded attention. Our
line of travel followed the Columbia in a general way, to the mouth of
the Grand coulee at the northeast corner of Douglas county, where we
turned south, as will be described in advance. In journeying along
the Columbia and in ascending Lake Chelan, observations were made
on the main features in the geology of the southern border of Okano-
gan county, which it may be well to record, since so little is known of
that promising region.
OKANOGAN COUNTY.
Okanogan county is rugged and mountainous throughout. The
mountains are composed mainly of gramitic rocks, which have been long
exposed to the action of the atmosphere. As we now see them with all
their picturesque detail, they are not the direct results of uplifts, as are
the mountains in the basaltic county to the south, but have been slowly
sculptured from a broad region of general high relief by running water
and glacial ice, assisted by the decay and disintegration to which granite
is especially prone.
The rocks in the southern portion of the county, just north of
Wenache, are quartzites and schists. Farther north, in the neigh-
borhood of Lake Chelan, these give place to coarse granite and closely
allied rocks. In the northern part of the county, drained by Okanogan
river, there are gold mines which are now attracting much attention.
The rocks in which the gold-bearing quartz is found are also granitic,
and the reports of prospectors show that the same formation has a
wide distribution north of the Columbia. On a geological sketch map,
by Willis,' a broad belt through the eastern and northern part of the
county is represented as being occupied by granite and crystalline
schists. It is from this general source that the gold so widely distrib.
uted along the streams of central Washington had its origin. Although
our knowledge of the geology of Okanogan county is but meager and
fragmentary, it seems safe to conclude that the county is occupied
almost entirely by crystalline schists, grauites, quartzites, etc., rocks
1U. S. Geol. Survey, Bull. No. 40.


U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
BULLETIN NO. 108 PL. VIil
GRAVEL TERRACE IN CANYON O THE COLUMBIA, NEAR CHELAN CROSSING.


RUSSELL.]
CHANGES IN DRAINAGE.
77
which are everywhere looked to for precious metals and a great variety
of useful minerals.
An exception to the prevailing rocks forming the surface occurs on
the east side of the valley of Okanogan river, where a tongue of
Columbia lava runs northward and probably extends beyond the
Canadian boundary. This northern exteusion of tle lava sheet form-
ing the Great Plain of the Columbia occupies an ancient valley which
was excavated previous to the lava inundation and is one of a series
of old drainage lines which were either wholly obliterated or greatly
changed by the inundation of lava. Many of these drainage channels
were again modified by the glaciers which occupied them at a later date.
Fire and frost have thus conspired to efface the work of the rivers.
Okanogan valley was one of several ancient drainage lines which suf.
fered a double invasion. The glacier which filled it flowed south and,
crossing the Columbia, occupied the northern portion of Douglas county.
Another great glacier flowed down from the highlands to the north
through Methow valley, and the deep depression in which Lake Chelan
now lies was also filled with ice from end to end. Other glaciers prob.
ably existed in the valleys along the east slope of the Cascades farther
south, but their records have not been examined. All of the glaciers
in Okanogan county, as shown by the scorings they left on the rocks
and the character of the bowlders strewn along their paths, flowed.
southward and drained snow fields on the Cascades. Many changes
in the direction of the streams resulted from this ice occupation, as
has already been mentioned. A few of the modifications have been
described by Willis in the bulletin already referred to. After the
retreat of the glaciers the valleys along the southern border of the
county, including the deep canyon of the Columbia, were left partially
filled with gravel and sand and clay, into which the streams have
reexcavated channels, leaving numerous terraces along their border.
Some of the details in this general history will be noticed in the follow.
ing itinerary of our journey.
Approach to Lake Chelan, -Our route from Wenache to Lake Che-
lan was by way of Waterville, and falls within the limits of Douglas
county, next to be described.
On reaching the west border of the plateau on which Waterville is
situated, we had a wide extent of the mountainous region embraced in
Okanogan county in view. Nearly every feature in the landscape
changed at once. The broadly undulating surface of the great plateau
forming the Great Bend country ends abruptly on the west in an irreg-
ular line of basaltic cliff's overlooking the Columbia, 2,000 feet below.
Standing on the verge of the camyon we note that the basalt is only a
"rim rock;" below it there are less precipitous slopes formed of schist
and granite and clothed scantily with pines. For the first time since
seeing the Columbia we find trees along its margins, showing that the
climate is much less arid than further south,
The west bank of the


78
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
river is also rugged and precipitous, but unlike its eastern wall, does
not rise to a level topped plateau, but is formed of bold mountain spurs
separated by deep valleys. Beyond the first forest-covered hills there
are others still higher, but without apparent arrangement, which merge
in the distance with lofty snow clad peaks.
On descending the side of the canyon, by means of a road following a
deep high-grade gorge, we notice that there are many terraces on each
side of the river. The most remarkable of these, and one of the finest
examples of terrace structure that can be found anywhere, is a level-
topped shelf formed of gravel and water-worn bowlers, the surface
of which is 700 feet above the Columbia. This truly remarkable ter.'
race is best developed about 2 miles below, where we descended into,
the canyon. It is there several hundred feet broad and runs back into
lateral gorges, showing that the sides of the main canyon are deeply,
scored by lateral drainage before the gravel forming the terrace was
deposited. On the west side of the valley there are other fragments
of the same deposits, forming a less conspicuous shelf, which has been
built against the steep slope, and has the same level as the great ter-
race on the east side of the river. The valley was excavated lower
than the bottom over which the Columbia now flows, and then filled
in from side to side with stream borne stones, gravel, and sand before
the present channel was excavated. In the reexcavation fragments of
the deposits filling the canyon have been left clinging to its slopes.
Streams flowing down lateral gorges have cut channels across the ter-
race, thus revealing its structure even more plainly than the steep
slope leading to the river. A view of the level surface of the ter-
race and of the steep slope toward the river, formed by the undercut-
ting of the stream and the sliding of material from above, is shown in
Plate VIII.
.
Above the valley opening in the west wall of the canyon and leading
to Lake Chelan there are other large remnants of the same great ter
race, this time on the west side of the river. In the broad plain formed
by the surface of the terrace there stands a lofty pyramid of solid rock
completely surrounded by the gravel deposit and rising like an island
from its level surface.
The terrace gravels extend into the valley of Lake Chelan and form
conspicuous terraces about its lower end. For many miles both up and
down the Columbia other fragments of the same level topped deposit
occur, always forming striking features in the landscape, owing to the
marked contrast of their smooth horizontal lines with the vertical line
due to the erosion of rills and creeks.
Beside the great terrace described above there are many others but
less conspicuous horizontal lines on the sides of the Columbia canyon.
Some of these below the horizon of the main terrace are stream ter-
races, made by the river in lowering its bed. A more numerous but
much less regular class are due to landslides, of which there have been


RUSSELL.]
TERRACES NEAR LAKE CHELAN.
79
many. Other horizontal lines are due to the unequal weathering of the
strata of basalt and of interstratified sedimentary beds.
Still another class of terraces, both numerous and conspicuous, have
been formed as moraines on the sides of the glacier that once filled the
canyon up to an elevation of 1,200 feet above the river as it flows to-day.
The moraine terraces are of older date than the great terrace described
above, and about the entrance of Chelan valley have been partially
buried by it.
In the canyon of the Columbia for several miles above Lake Chelan
its rugged sides are strewn with thousands of perched bowlders, left
by the retreat of the ice. These have a definite upper limit, but
mingled with them are masses of basalt that have fallen quite recently
from the cliff's above.
In embayments along the sides of the main canyon and back of the
ridges of stone and bowlers left by the ancient glaciers, there are flat
areas which have been filled in with fine material, washed from higher
levels. These plains have in some instance been cut by small streams
flowing across them, thus adding other horizontal lines to the complex
topography of the canyon walls.
It is not practicable to describe these terraces in detail, but those
who visit Lake Chelan will have an opportunity to read for themselves
the remarkable history which they record. In studying them, how.
ever, the traveler must bear in mind that the canyon, after being cut
through various rocks to a depth greater than it now has, was occu-
pied by a great glacier, and then by an arm of a large lake, and that
river, glacial and lacustral records are inscribed on the same slope. In
addition there have been many landslides, producing deceptivo, ter-
race-like forms, and terraces due to the unequal weathering of hard
and soft beds.
The approach to Lake Chelan is so full of interesting features that
the traveler will hesitate to press on in spite of the attractive lake
scenery beyond. From Chelan crossing to Lake Chelan is about 2
miles. The surface of the lake is, by aneroid, 325 feet above the river.
The stream flowing from the lake is a bright, clear river, which runs
at such a rate, even in its more quiet reaches, that its surface is every.
where flecked with foam. The freshness and irregularity of the chan-
nel through which it makes its wild descent is one of the first facts to
attract attention. It emerges onto the lowest terrace bordering the
Columbia from a deep, impassable gorge as one mass of shining foam.
'The walls rising above the stream show fresh breaks and are very
precipitous. It is evident at a glance that the channel has but re-
cently been excavated and has but few of the characteristics of a val.
ley formed by stream erosions. In brief, the history of the outlet of
the lake is this: When the great glacier which occupied the valley of
Lake Chelan up to an elevation at the south end, of nearly a thousand
feet above the present water surface, melted back and slowly retreated


80
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. {BULL. 108.
up the valley, it left a terminal moraine across the entrance where Che-
lan city now stands. With the retreat of the glacier came the ad-
vance of Lake Lewis, which filled the channel of the Columbia up to
the level of the great terrace, which still remains in the canyon. Lake
Lewis also occupied the lower part of Chelan valley and left its record
• as a broad terrace 325 feet above the lake. When the waters of Lake
Lewis fell the Columbia canyon and the entrance of Chelan valley were
filled to a common level with moraines and stream-borne gravels. The
Columbia began to reexcavate its channel, a task still unfinished, and
the drainage from Lake Chelan cut a new outlet as the main river pro-
gressed with its task. The overflow from Lake Chelan, however, did
not take the direct course to the Columbia, which a former outlet had
occupied, but instead was turned abruptly to the south by a break caused
by a laudslide, and reached its goal by a tortuous channel between two
immense fallen masses of the mountain side, each of which is fully half
a mile long. The outlet of the old channel, which is now deeply buried,
may be recognized a hundred yards up the main stream, from where
Chelan river now enters the Columbia. Large springs occur at that
locality, formed by the water that percolates through the gravel filling
the old valley.
On each side of the entrance to Chelan valley there are many ter-
races. The broadest of these is the old lake terrace 325 feet over the
present lake. The highest terraces of all and also some at lower hori.
zons are due to lateral moraines, which accumulated along the border
of the old glacier. These may be distinguished from the lake terraces
by their lack of uniformity in height, by their being built largely of
angular and partially rounded bowlers, and by the fact that they are
not level topped terraces sloping lakeward from a sea cliff, but form
free ridges of coarse material, with a narrow valley back of them. The
moraines above the broad lake terrace are much more distinct than
those below that level, because the lower ones have been partially
removed and partially covered by clays and gravels deposited in the
deeper portions or along the shores of the old lake. A curved moraine,
having a height of about 175 feet above the present lake, was thrown
completely across the entrance of the valley, where the site of Chelan
city has been chosen. The moraine was buried by the sediments of the
post-glacial lake, but when the drainage was reestablished it was cut
through and a section of its central portion half a mile long removed.
The remaining fragments of this moraine, containing many large bowl.
ders, may be seen, one on the south side of the Chelan river, where it
leaves the lake, and the other on the north side of the flat on which
the town is located.
Lake Chelan. On looking at a map of the state of Washington it
will be noticed that Lake Chelan is the only large water body in the
state. It is exceptional in its form also, and not only differs from all
of the smaller lakes in the state, but does not have a counterpart any.


U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
BULLETIN NO. 108 PL. IX
VIEW
NE
TH
HEAD OF LAKE CHELAN, LOOKING WEST.


RUSSELL.]
SCENERY OF LAKE CHELAN.
81
where in the Cascades or Sierra Nevada. The only lakes which seem
to be closely similar to it in the Cordilleran region are Arrow and Koo-
tenay lakes in British Columbia. Lake Chelan is a narrow, river-like
sheet of water, which extends from the south border of the mountain.
ous country forming Okanogan county 65 to 70 miles northward, right
into the heart of the mountains. The extension of the valley north.
west of the head of the lake which las been filled in by stream deposits
is reported to be 15 to 20 miles in length, making the whole depression
about 100 miles long. The breadth is remarkably uniform throughout
and seldom exceeds 2 miles at the level of the lake, except at the
south, where the mountains embrace it less closely. It then expands
to probably 3 miles in width, and has terraced shores which are com-
paratively low, especially on the south side. The subdued landscapes
about this portion of the lake prescut a pleasing contrast to the wild,
canyon-like scenery farther within the water filled gorge.
The mountains inclosing Lake Chelan on each side, north of the
somewhat expanded southern terminus, rise abruptly from its margin
to great heights and are unbroken by deep side valleys. Tor 50 miles
the walls inclosing the valley rise to heights of 5,000 to 6,000 feet. All
of their lower slopes are dark with pines, but their bare, serrated crests
are white with snow long after the flowers of spring have faded on the
lower slopes.
The waters of the lake are clear and sparkling and have the deep
blue of the ocean. The sounding line has shown a great depth. Al-
though our examination was hasty and we were not prepared for a syste
matic survey, we found that the depth in the upper portion of the lake
exceeded 1,100 feet, the length of the line that was extemporized for
the measurement. The surface of the lake is only about 950 feet above
the sea; its bottom is therefore below sea level.
The mountains throughout the entire extent of the lake are of gramite
and closely allied rocks. When one attempts to discover how such a
mighty gash, 100 miles long, from 6,000 to 7,000 feet deep, and reaching
below sea level, could have been excavated, it is best to pause until all
the accessible facts bearing on the question can be assembled and their
meaning interpreted.
Our trip up Lake Chelan and return was made in a small steamer
named The Belt, which was much more comfortable than one would be
apt to anticipate in such an unfrequented corner of the world. The
start from Chelan city was made at 7 in the morning on a beautiful
June day, and at 5 in the evening the little boat was moored among
the tall trees overhanging a sheltered inlet at its head. All day long
we traversed placid waters, each turn in the gently curving shores re-
vealing more and more wonderful scenes and still increasing splendors.
'The clifts rise vertically from the water, usually not leaving space
enough on which a fisherman might stand, and tower aloft to such.
dizzy heights that the pines clinging to each ledge and filling each side
Bull. 108-
-6


82
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. (BULL. 108.
ravine, lose their individuality and become mingled in a general cover-
ing of green, which fades to the gray of lichen covered slopes before
the shining snow fields on the higher summits are reached. Much of
the charm of the fascinating scenery is due to the fact that its wild,
natural beauties have been untouched by the destroying hand of man.
The threads of silvery foam descending from unseen regions above
gleam and flash through the overhanging ferns and flowers just as they
did for centuries before man came to admire their freshness and beauty.
The splendors of the mighty mountains on each side of the lake
continued on and on as we penetrated deeper and deeper into the
unknown region. Nor does the wonder cease when the head of naviga
tion is reached and a dense forest replaces the shimmering plain of
blue. The valley continues still farther northward, the bordering walls
inclosing it contivue to increase in height and more and more of their
summits are snow covered, and far away against the sky glimpses are
revealed of still mightier summits, which we were told were a portion
of the Cascades.
The walls of granite inclosing Lake Chelan are rounded and worn,
showing the work of glaciers which once flowed through the valley;
but, except in the general form of the outstanding buttresses and
domes, the records of ice action are slight. There is a remarkable
absence of débris on the slopes. No traces of moraines can be recog-
nized, except in some of the lateral gorges, and as already stated, at
the foot of the lake. In a few sheltered places on the surfaces of
swelling domes, however, the grooves and strize made by glacial
action can be recognized, and in themselves are sufficient, if unsup-
ported by other evidence, to show that glaciers had flowed through the
valley.
We remained at the head of the lake one night, and the next day
returned to our camp near Chelan city. It was with a feeling of
relief that we emerged from the portals of the magnificent valley, and
saur again the green, terraced slopes where the scattered houses and
the gleaming church spire of an Indiau village gave a suggestion of
civilization to the scene. 'The milder beauties of the southern end of
the lake add a pleasing contrast to the magnificence of the northern
portion, and make the scenery of Lake Chelan more attractive than
that of any other lake in the Far West. Not even far-famed Tahoe,
with its wide expanse of deep, blue waters and wild, wooded shores,
can be said to excel Chelan in magnificence. The lakes at the southern
base of the Alps are more nearly of the same type, but their natural
beauties, bare of the poetry and romance that has been woven about
them, are no more attractive than the river-like sheet of colorless water
which fills a mighty cleft in the Cascade mountains in northern Wash-
ington.
•
The completion of the Great Northern railroad to Wenache will
bring Lake Chelan within easy communication with a main line of


RUSSELL.]
DOUGLAS COUNTY.
83
travel. Small steamers running on the Columbia will enable the trav-
eler to reach the lake within ten or twelve hours after arriving at
Wenache.
If the few words of praise whick I have given to Lake Chelan should
induce weary mortals in quest of rest and recreation to visit its shores,
I shall be fully repaid. The foke abounds in trout, and on the mount-
tains overlooking it I am told there are deer and mountain goats. The
hotel accommodations are not of the best, but will no doubt improve.
‚Delightful camping places can be had at many points along the water's
edge. Those who wish to fully enjoy the grandeur and romance of a
wild life in a wild country can not do better than to provide themselves
with a suitable boat and camping outfit, and move from one point of
interest to another along the lake shore as their fancy may dictate.
DOUGLAS COUNTY.
Douglas county is bounded on the north, west, and south by the
Columbia river. It comprises the greater part of what is popularly
known as the Big Bend country. Its surface is largely a sagebrush
desert of little value, where water cam not be lad for irrigation; yet
in the higher portion to the west and north in the vicinity of Water-
ville, and again along the border of Lincoln county, the rainfall is
sufficient to allow of the raising of wheat without irrigation. As a rule
the crops are light.
The greater wart of Douglas county is so situated that waters can
not be had for irrigation at a warrantable expense. The Columbia river,
skirting three-fourths of its border, flows in a cauyon 2,000 feet below
the surface. After leaving its canyon and cutting through Saddle
mountain, its banks are much lower and in places favor the use of the
stream for irrigation. The project of constructing a large ditch to
start at the gateway through Saddle mountain and carry water to the
sagebrush desert north of White bluff, is already under consideration.
Plans for taking water from Spokane river and conducting it westward
to the thirsty land of Lincoln and Douglas counties has also been sug-
gested. These projects, however, involve the expenditure of large
sums of money in order to carry them into effect, even if engineers re-
port them practicable.
The dearth of water for irrigation and the partially insurmountable
difficulties in the way of securing it from streams, have led the citizens
of Douglas county to hope that artesian water could be found within
their border. Our reconnoissance, however, did not show that the
geological conditions are at all favorable to these expectations.
The rocks of Douglas county are mainly and characteristically basalt.
The Columbia lava occupies every square mile of area, with the excep-
tion of a strip less than 2 miles in average width along the Columbia
upstream from Rock rapids to the mouth of Grand coulee. The average


84
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
thickness of the basalt is thought to be about 2,000 feet. In this ex-
posed edge overlooking the Columbia, its general thickness is not over
500 or 600 feet.
Beneath the Columbia lava opposite Wenache, there are sandstones
and shales as already explained, which beloug to the coal-bearing rocks
better exposed at Wenache and at Roslyn. How far these extend
eastward and northward beneath the basalt we have no means at pres-
ent of knowing. In tho northern half of the county the basalt rests
directly on granite and gneiss. The lower rocks were much disturbed .
and deeply eroded before the basalt was spread out above them, and
the basin structure necessary to secure an artesian flow does not exist.
Hence the conclusion that it is useless to drill for water for agricultural
purposes even though the demand for it is great.
In the southern part of the county there are heavy deposits of John
Day beds above the basalt, as may be seen especially at White bluffs
along the Columbia. Farther north these beds are thin and in many
places have been almost entirely eroded away. Glacial deposits and
the slight records left by Lake Lewis will be noticed in advance. 'The
conditions necessary for the existenco of subterranean water under
pressure do not exist in these superficial deposits; this conclusion is
sustained by borings that have been made at Pasco and to a less depth
at other stations on the Northern Pacific railroad.
Wenache to Waterville and Chelan crossing.-At Wenache the Colum-
bia makes a broad sweep to the west and is cutting away its right
bank. On the east side of the river there is a narrow tract of low land
covered in part with drifting sand beyond which there are high terraces
concealing sandstones and shales, while far above rise basaltic cliffs
formed by the edge of the Columbia lava. To gain the top of the
plateau, rising as it does 2,000 feet above the river, is not an easy task
even for the pedestrian. In order to reach it with our wagon we fol-
lowed the stage road along the east bauk of the river for about 12 miles
and then turning sharply to the right traversed a road up a high grade
gorge which led to the summit.
About Wenache and along the river to the south, there are great
quantities of angular bowlders, some of them of large size, composed
principally of quartzite, granite, and schists, which were carried to their
present positions by ice. 'The great increase in the number of bowlders,
as well as their large size, to be noted as one approaches Wenache
in ascending the river, indicates that a change in the geology may be
expected.
Two or three miles above the ferry landing opposite Wenache, we
came to bold outcrops of gneiss formed by contorted and for the most
part nearly vertical layers, on which rested light colored sandstones
aud shales in a horizontal position. The sedimentary beds belong to
the Kittitas system and are conspicuous on account of their prevail.
ing light colors and also because of many brilliant red layers, which,


RUSSELL.)
SURFACE FEATURES NEAR WATERVILLE.
85
as already suggested, probably owe their bright tints to the burning
of thin coal seams.
l'arther up the valley the steep precipitous eastern bluff is composed
of' gneiss and quartzite up to the base of the precipice of columnar
basalt crowning its summit. Many landslides have fallen from the
eastern escarpment and greatly modified the minor features in its relief.
'Lhese slides are sometimes 200 or 300 feet high and a quarter of a mile
long. In places they obstruct the river and have even turned it from
its course. The larger masses that have fallen are of gneiss, but in the
confused heap of débris there are many angular blocks of basalt de-
rived from the precipice far above. The narrow strip of low land adja-
cent to the river is so heavily encumbered with these fragments that
it is with difficulty a roadway has been found among them, but in one
or two places there are sheltered nooks large enough for peach orchards
and gardens. The west bank of the river is formed of bold bluff's of
gneiss about the base of which there is not room enough for a man to
pass. The banks of the canyon are so steep even on the east that but
faint traces are left of the terraces still so strongly marked along the
river both above and below.
On the plateau surface near Waterville, there are rounded hills with
broad flat-bottomed valleys which mark the courses of former drainage.
lines, but now the amount of moisture supplied by rain and snow is so
small that it is absorbed by the soil and does not flow overthe sur-
face sufficiently to cut even rill channels in the grass covered surfaces
of the filled valleys. Hard rock seldom appears at the surface. Wells
sunk in the soil reveal a layer of marly clay, a remnant of the sediments
of Lake Jol Day, which formerly covered the entire plateau. Some of
the wells having a depth of about 200 feet, pass through 15 to 20 feet of
soil, 20 to 30 feet of fine, evely stratified clay, 40 to 80 feet of basalt,.
25 to 30 feet of sand and clay and then enter a second bed of basalt
which has never been penetrated, but is probably 400 or 500 feet thick.
'The rainfall in this otherwise ideal farming region is small, but is yet
usually sufficient to insure a fair crop of wheat without irrigation.
The soil is unusually rich as is the case generally throughout Douglas
county, but irrigation is impossible as the only stream in the region is
the Columbia, which flows 2,000 feet below the surface of the plateau.
Where the soil is not under cultivation there is a luxuriant growth of
bunch grass which, together with the light rainfall, has much to do with
the origin and formation of the subdued topographic forms.
This beautiful region with its gentle relief and flowing outlines, its
green fields and comfortable houses, has a rural beauty that. places it
in pleasing contrast to the brown and barren desert lands with which
it is bordered on the east, and to the rugged mountains west of the Co
lumbia. Its principal interest to the geologist lies in the evidence of a
formerly greuter rainfall and in the absence of all glacial records. The
glaciers from the highlands beyond the Columbia passed to the west


86
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
and also to the north, leaving this high plateau unscored and without
moraines or bowlers. Itselevation placed it above the waters of Lake
Lewis, so that icebergs freighted with stones were not floated over it.
Waterville is a thriving agricultural town without either railroad or
steamboat connections. Our route lay through the town and west-
ward across undulating prairie lands that extend to the brink of the
great gorge through which the Columbia flows. As we approach-the
western verge of the plateau the full grandeur of the snow-tipped
mountains along the western horizon become more and more fully
revealed. At the brink of the canyon the ground falls away in vast
precipices, and far below we can trace the winding course of the river,
so deeply sunken that it appears like a silvery brook. When the moun-
tains are cloud-capped and bands of shining vapor roll eastward over
the plateau, sending down refreshing showers and relieving the mon-
tony of the plain by dashes of sunshine and dark gliding shadows,
the scene becomes wonderfully beautiful and presents such marked
contrasts that the eye does not soon weary of the picture.
The canyon of the Columbia at Chelan crossing, with its interesting
terraces, has already been noticed in the account of our approach to
Lake Chelan. After returning from our excursion up the lake, we re-
newed our journey on the plateau and followed the general course of
the Columbia to the north of the Grand coulee.
Chelan crossing to Grand Coulee.-On traveling northeast from the
border of the plateau overlooking Lake Chelan, for about 10 miles, we
gradually left behind us the farms that cluster about Waterville aud
crossed a still more prairie region in which the carpet of bunch grass
was unbroken. Just when our ride was becoming monotonous, our at-
tention was attracted by a new feature in the topography of the prairie.
* In front of us rose an irregular undulating ridge, which started
at the brink of the canyon on our left and ran for many miles to the
southeast, until lost to view in the distance. On the ridge and
rendering it conspicuous from a distance of several miles were hun-
dreds of bowlders, some of them larger than the cabios of the set-
tlers to be seen here and there among them. Actual measurements
show that many of the blocks are between 50 and 60 feet in their vari.
ous diameters. Beyond the first line of bowlers resting on the ridge
others could be seen, and on gaining the top of the ridge, we
found that the country to the east as far as the eye could reach was
strewn with them. Sometimes the bowlers are piled in heaps, but usu.
ally they are separated by a few rods of grassy meadow. The greater
part of the bowlers and all of the larger ones are black basalt, which
in many cases shows a well defined columnar structure. A strange ap.
pearance is given to the scene by the various directions in which the
joints dividing the volcanic blocks are inclined. With the angular
masses of basalt there are also occasional bowlders of granite, gneiss,
ete., of smaller size, but frequently measuring 8 or 10 feet in diameter.


RUSSELL.]
GLACIAL DAM IN COLUMBIA CANYON.
87
The reason for the change in the character of the surface of the
platean was easily detected. • The evidence of ice action was not only
recorded by the bowlers, but in the surfaces of outcropping layers of
basalt which were planed down and scored by lines running southeast,
conforming with the trend of the long lines of bowlders and showing
the direction in which the ice invasion moved.
The great glacier which carried bowlers in thousands over the
northern border of Douglas county came from the north down the
broad valley now drained by Okanogan river, and crossed the canyon
of the Columbia without being deflected from its general course. The
passago of the Columbian canyon is remarkable, as the great glacier
on reaching its southern wall formed by basalt resting on granite met
an escarpment running directly across its course and 2,500 feet high.
The gramite on the face of this bluff' is much disintegrated, but in
places from top to bottom the scoring of the ice can be recognized.
Where the earth has been recently removed the surface of the rock is
highly polished and covered by fine strise.
The glacier from Okanogan valley on reaching the Columbia di-
vided; one arm flowed down the river valley to join other glaciers
from Methow and Chelan valleys, but the course of this branch has
not been traced. 'The greater part of the glacier continued on south.
enstward, however, and reached to about the present site of Coulee
city, where it ended in Lake Lewis. The eastern border of the glacier
nfter reaching the basaltic platean of Douglas county was determined
by the Crand Coulee, which was cut before the ice invasion. The
huge bowlders and piles of debris left by the glacier may be traced to
the western verge of the Grand Coulee, all the way from Coulee city
northward to where the great gorge in the plateau joins the camyon
of the Columbia. Bowlers and all other evidences of an ice invasion
are absent to the east of Grand Coulee. The country there assumes
the characteristics of the region about Waterville and wheat fields and
farmhouses give diversity to the landscape. The subsoil is once more
of fine, sandy clay, belonging to the John Day system. Our reconnois.
sance only touched the southern limit of the formerly glaciated region
of northwestern Washington and anything like a discussion of the con-
dition of that region during the glacial period will have to be post-
poned. After leaving Chelan crossing our next camp was in the val.
ley of West Foster creek. Here again we found an exanuple of the
way in which the basaltic plateau inclosed by the Big bend of the
Columbia was cut by deep lines of erosion at some former period when •
the rainfall was more copious than now. Foster creek has three main
branches, or, more accurately, the canyon through which it flows when
the spring and winter rainfall gather force enough to make a stream,
has three deep, wide branches, which receive secondary gorges. The
branching of the canyons and their wide bottoms show that the streams
which cut them were sustained long enough to form a well developed


88
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
drainage system with several branches. The branches converge to-
ward the main channel, which leads northward and joins the Columbia
by a steep descent of 300 or 400 feet. Foster creek with its various
branches is plainly a part of the Columbia drainage, and has been pro-
duced by the same general conditions that admitted of the excavation
of the greater drainage channel to which it is tributary.
'The cutting of Foster creek canyon was assisted by the fact that the
basaltic covering of the granite is there thin and of irregular thickness
owing to the inequalities in the surface on which it rests. The thick-
ness of the basalt varies from a few feet up to 400 or 500 and in places
along the Columbia to the east of Roster creek it is not less than a
thousand feet. The surface of the basalt is practically a plain, and its
unequal thickness, as well as the decay and disintegration of the gran-
ite beneath, shows that the basalt was poured out over an old land
surface which had been deeply eroded. This conclusion is also sus-
tained by islands of granite in the neighborhood of the Grand coulee
which rise through the basalt. 'These isolated areas are within a few
miles of the border of the basaltic flood. Farther south its thickness
is so great that all traces of the relief of the surface over which it flowed
have been blotted out and a new topography initiated.
'The bowlders so conspicuous on the plateau in which the canyon of
Foster creek and its branches have been cut, do not appear in the bot.
tom of the chamnels except where they have been laid bare by erosion.
The floors of the canyons and the lower slopes of their walls are deeply
buried beneath fine white silt and clay. These beds are the records of a
time when a lake occupied the canyon subsequent to the ice invasion.
The highest limit of these deposits is about 125 feet above the bottoms.
of the gorges, or 450 feet above the Columbia. This is about the level,
judging from aneroid measurements, of the surface of the great terrace
in the canyon of the Columbia near Lake Chelan and of the highest
water lines left by Lake Lewis on the slopes of Badger and Saddle
mountains.
After Foster creek canyon was left dry by the recession of the lake
which once occupied it the fine sediments left in its bottom were
reexcavated, leaving well-formed terraces along some portions of the
channel, more especially in the East fork, a vieir of which is given in
Pl. XI.
From our camp on Foster creek Mr. Storrow and I rode northwest
along the summit of the cliffs overlooking the Columbia and finally
reached a grove of pines crowming the highest point on the brink
of the canyon opposite the mouth of Okanogan river. The view
from this point is especially instructive, as it embraces not only
the bowlder-strewn plains to the south, but also the deep gorge of
the Columbia and the mountains beyond, from which the ancient
glaciers came. From an advanced station on the verge of the.
cliffs we could examine the south wall of the canyon and see the


U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
BULLÉTIN NO. 108 PL.
X
BOWLDERS OF BASALT ON GREAT PLAIN OF THE COLUMBIA.


RUSSELL.]
COLUMBIA LAVA IN OKANOGAN VALLEY.
89
junction between the sheet of lava forming its summit and the coarse
reddish granite beneatl. An absence of debris on the steep escarp-
ment was especially noticeable, and has its explanation in common,
with the origin of the large number of bowlders of basalt on the plain
extending south from the top of the escarpment. The great glacier
that descended Okanogan valley was of sufficient thickness to ride
over the cliff 2,400 feet high which crossed its path and to carry away
huge masses of its hard capping layer and leave them scattered over
the plain beyond for a distance of 50 miles.
At the junction of Columbia and Okanogan rivers there is a triangu-
lar valley or expausion of the canyon of the Columbia, which was
deeply filled with light-colored clays and gravel deposited by the
waters which succeeded the occupation of the valley by ice. Since
the lake was drained these deposits have been beautifully terraced by
the rivers as they reexcavated their channels. The sagebrush covered
plains at the junction of the two streams is so situated that it can be
irrigated without great expense and is one of the most promising
tracts of land for agricultural purposes in the region.
To the east of the valley of the Okanogan and occupying a portion
of a much wider valley of older data there is a basaltic plateau which
extends at least 15 or 20 miles north of Douglas county and is a part
of the series of volcanic rocks which covers the Big Bend county, but
it is now detached owing to the cutting of a channel across it by the
Columbia. The surface of this northern arn of basalt, like the much
greater plane to the south, is strewn with immense bowlers, some of
which attract the attention from a distance of 10 miles.
How far north the basaltic sheet in Okanogan valley may extend is
not positively known, but on a sketch map published by Willis,' the
country about Mount Bovaparte, 50 miles to the north, is indicated as
being of the same geological character as the rocks of Douglas county.
The mountains on each side of Okanogan valley are subdued and
ronnded in contour, suggesting glacial action, or long disintegration
and decay. The report of Willis, and my own observations of the
character of the debris and of the nearer portion of the uplifts them.
selves, indicate that these mountains are composed of' gramite.
From Foster creek our line of march leads almost due east to the
mouth of the Grand Coulee, a distance of about 35 miles. The plateau
surface throughout this portion of Douglas county is strewn with
bowlders and on the outcropping edge of basaltic sheets the familiar
striations left by moving ice were seen in several places. Bowlers are
scattered broadcast over the plain, but without much regularity or
order; there are, however, no conspicuous moraines and only a slight
accumulation of' what might be called ground moraine. The hollows
in the rocks are filled mostly with angular gramitic sands. In places
there are inclosed basins of all sizes up to several acres in extent,
1 U. S. Geol. Survey, Bull. 40.


90
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. (BULL. 108.
some of which hold water, while others have been filled so as to form
swampy meadows. Springs are frequent along the bases of basaltic
outcrops, indicating that the surface waters percolate downward until
they meet the junction of two sheets of lava, perhaps with a thin layer
of lapilli between, and then travel laterally until a canyon or broken
scarp is reached, where they rise to the surface. These springs are
supplied by the rainfall of the immediate region, and are of the nature
of hillside springs'so common the world over, and do not indicate an
artesian basin, as many sanguine persons have been led to suppose.
Turning south at the locality where the east boundary of Douglas
county reaches the Columbia, we traversed Grid. Coulee to Coulee
city and thence south to Moses lake and the White bluffs on the Co
lumbia.
Grand. Coulee. -As remarked by Symons', the Grand Coulee is oue of
the most notable features of the Great Plain of the Columbia. It.is a
canyon with vertical walls 300 or 400 feet high, between which there is
a flat-bottom valley occupied in places by lakes, some of which are
strongly alkaline. Its length from the Columbia at the north to
Coulee city is about 30 miles; its eastern wall then disappears and
the level floor of the canyon merges with the plain which extends east-
ward; the western wall is continuous for 20 miles farther, and over,
looks a narrower but still wilder and more desolate valley, which is
bounded on the east by awother vertical wall that begins just south
of Coulee city. The top of the east wall of the canyou south of' Coulee
city is on alevel with the bottom of the gorge to the north. The
desceut from one gorge to the other is made in one vertical descent-
over which a river formerly rolled, as will be explained in advance.
In the lower canyon there are several lakes; those at the north are
fresh and soinetimes overflow, while those at the south are inclosed and
strongly alkaline. At the south end of the lower canyon the cast wall
again disappears, and the gorge opens out ou a plain, but the line of
ancient drainage is again continued farther south by another Darrow
gorge, occupied in part by Moses lake.
In the part of Grand Coulce, north of Coulee city, the width is about
a mile and a half at the south and probably about 4 miles near the
northern end. The abrupt expansion at the north is due to the fact
that the basalt is there thin, and in places is wanting altogether, the
granite rock beneath rising through it like islands. Some of the iso-
lated rocks standing in its northern portion are of gramite; others are
of granite with a capping of basalt, while still others are composed
entirely of basalt. Below Coulee city the canyon is less than a mile
broad and its walls are entirely of basalt. Something of the wild
scemery of the canyon walls may be gathered from the illustration
forming Plate xII, which is reproduced from a photograph taken north
I Report on the Upper Columbia river, p. 119.


U. 8. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
BULLETIN NO. 103 PL.
)
STREAM TERRACES, FOSTER CREEK, DOUGLAS COUNTY, WASHINGTON.


RUSSELL.) ORIGIN OF THE COULEES IN DOUGLAS COUNTY.
91
of Coulee city. The rocky face of the precipice shown in this illustra-
tion has been retouched and given a more massive appearance than it
has in nature.
The history of the Grand Coulee and of its southern prolongation is
the same as is recorded in Crab creek bottom, Wake Cumtux, and Moses
conlees, and Foster creek canyons, which have already been noticed.
On looking north from Coulee city it is noticeable that the strata on
the east side of Grand Coulee have a slight inclination eastward, while
the strata on the west side are horizontal. Again, in the canyon south
of Coulee city, the strata in the west wall, which is much higher than
the eastern dip west, i. e., away from the canyon, at an angle of 80
or 100, while the strata in the east wall are practically horizontal.
The west wall retains its superior height all the way to Soap lake,
which is at the south end of the middle section of the coulee. The
presence of a fault in this portion of the coulee is also plainly shown
by the relation of the strata on its opposite sides. Abont Moses lake
no evidence of a break was distingnished, and the strata on each side
are about horizontal.
The coulees are due primarily to breaks in the basalt forming the
plateau, along which the rocks were generally faulted. The breaks
gave direction to the drainage when the climate was much more humid
than at present, and canyons were eroded. • The partial filling of the
canyons at a subsequent period, when many of them were occupied by
arms of a large Pleistocene lake, accounts for their level floors, in
which modern drainage has failed to make any but the most insignifi.
cant records. The deposits which obstruct the drainage below Soap
lake appear to have been laid down in the Pleistocene lake, but in this
connection my observations are meager. Recent changes of level
along the old fault lines are suspected in certain instances, Unt have
not been clearly demonstrated.
One of the most interesting episodes in the history of Grand Coulee
remains to be noticed. Its bottom at the north, where it opens out into
the much larger canyon of the Columbia, is 500 feet above the present
river, and the descent from one to the other is a precipice. There was
once a cascade here, which was cut back or receded about half a mile,
when the water of the Grand Coulee flowed to the Columbia. When the
ice from the Okanogan country discharged south it crossed the Colum
bia and dammed its waters, which then escapes southward by way of
Grand Coulee.' This deep, broad canyon, as previously stated, limited
the extension of the ice to the east, after it deployed upon the Big Bend
country; its debris occurs up to the very brink of the canyon ou the
west, but is absent on the east. At this time the glacier must have
poured over the western wall and, breaking off, charged the river with
bergs. These were swept along and spread out over the plain to the
south, where the gorge opened out at the present site of Coulee city,
'A temporary occupation of- Grand Coulee by the water of the Columbia was
recognized by Symons.
Report on the Upper Columbia river, p. 109.


92
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. (BULL. 108.
and there dropped in immense quantities and still obstructs the plain.
During a part of the time at least, when the Columbia flowed through
Grand Coulee, it emptied into Lake Lewis, at the present site of Coulee
city, but a careful study of levels is required before the details in the
history of the river and of the lake can be satisfactorily made out.
The canyon below Coulee city is about 400 feet lower than the bottom
of the great gorge leading north to the Columbia. For a portion of
the time that the great river flowed through the coulees it plunged into
the lower canyon over a precipice approximately 400 feet high and
wore out deep basins n the rocks below. The basins at the foot of the
precipice are now filled with water by the raius of winter, and form
the first of a series of lakes which do not ordinarily overflow. The
lakes in this series farther south are alkaline, the last one, Soap lake,
being heavily charged with soda salts.
No more impressive seene can be found in the Big Bend country than
is presented by the great cliffs of black basalt below Coulee city, over
which the Columbia once poured, but where now all is hushed and
desert shrubs grow in the ancient channel.
Moses coulee, like the gorge below Coulee city, begins abruptly and
has small lakes at its head. The beginning of this deep depression in
the basaltic plateau was not visited during the present reconnoissance;
all the information we have concerwing it is derived from Symons's
report and from conversations with ranchmen. The fact that it begins
at about the southern limit reached by the ice invasion from the north,
suggests that it may at one time have been flooded by water from the
melting ice.
The existence of the coulees along lines of fracture and of faulting
was recognized by Symons, who extended the hypothesis to the canyou
of Snake river and other streams crossing the region occupied by
Columbia lava. Whether this extension is sustained by observation or
not I have failed to learn, but I venture to suggest that the facts
reported by others do not seem to favor it.
Lakes. Several of the small lakes in the coulees described above are
of fresh water, and in some instauces occasionally overflow; others are
alkaline, and in at least one instance strongly charged with saline
matter. The water of a small lake in the bottom of the coulee, about 4
miles north of Coulee city, is too alkaline to be drank, but is not suffi-
ciently dense to be of economic importance. 'The lake is shallow and
belongs to the class of desert lakes termed "playa lakes," for the
reason that they sometimes evaporate to dryness and leave broad mud
flats or playas.
The lakes in the canyon just south of Coulee city overflow at times
into other lakes farther south. This is in reality the beginning of a
series of evaporating paus which ends in Soap lake. A sample of the
water of this lake was collected by Mr. Storrow and myself and has
been analyzed at the chemical laboratory of the U.S. Geological
Survey.


U. S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
BULLETIN NO. 108 PL. XII
WEST WALL OF GRAND COULEE.


RUSSELL.]
ANALYSES OF WATERS.
93
Analysis of the water of Soap lake, Washington, by George Steiger.
Hypothetical composition.
Constitnents.
Parts ima Per cent
in total
thousand.
solids.
Constituents.
Parts ina
Per cent
in total
thonsand solids.
Silica, SiO, ........
Sulpburic acid, SOs
Carbonio acid, COz.
Chlorine, Cl....
Calcium, Ca..
Magnesium, Mg
Sodium, Na.
Hydrogen in bicarbonates, H
0•113
4°362
9-625
3:526
Traco.
0•011
10-501
0•053
0•40
15°47
34•13
12:50
Trace.
0•04
37°25
0•19
Sodium chloride, NaCI
Sodium sulphate, SO....
Sodium carbonate, NaCO..
Sodium bicarbonate, NaHCO.
Marnesium bicarbouato. Mg
5•810
6•453
11•340
4•412
0•066
20•61
22-88
40-22
15-65
0'23
Caleium bicarbonate, Cal, Trace.
(CO3)2.
Silica, SiO, .....
0•113
Traco.
0°40
28•194
99-08
28-194
99•99
NOTE.-Mr. Steiger also noted that tho reaction of the water was strongly alkaline; and that it con-
tained a sediment amounting to abont four parts in a million, which was composed of calcium, a small
amount of sulphur, and orgauic matter. Tho water also contained o large amount of organic matter
in solution.
A comparison of the above analysis with analyses of other lakes in
the arid region, some of the most important of which are given in the
following table, shows that although the proportions of sodium car
bonate and bicarbonate in the water are not as high as in other instances,
amounting only to 15.7 per cent, yet in the weight of total solids they
are greater than in any other similar instance at present known,
amounting, as shown in the last column in the above table, to nearly
56 per cent.
Analyses of the waters of alkaline lakes in the arid region. I
[Expressed in parts in a 1,000.]
Constituents.
Albert
Great Salt Humboldt
lako,
lake,"
Oregon.?
Utah.
lako,
Nevada.
Soda lake.
Nevada.
Mono
lake.3
Owens
lake,
California.
California. 3
Sodium, Na..
Potassium, K
Calciam, Ca.....
Magnesium, Mg
Lithium, Li
Chlorine, Cl.
Bromine, Br
Carbonic acid, CO,
Sulphuric acid, SO...
Phosphoric acid, EPO
Nitric acid, NO,
Boracic acid, B0,.
Silica, SiO,...
Alumina, A1203...
Iron, sesquioxide, F0,0,
Organio matter..
Hydrogen, in bicarbonates.
14°245
*521
13•055
19•690
2-407
•255
3-780
Traco.
83-946
Traco.
*27842
•06083
•01257
•01648
Traco.
•29545
40•919
2•357
•215
18•837
•920
•109
•054
26-836
1:548
•013
•004
40•851
11:582
18-214
9•199
•685
9•858
*20126
•03040
•00069
.....
16-858
11•857
13:100
6:384
18-265
7•067
Traco.
Trace.
•03250
•286
•278
153
067
003
•346
•207
•023
•013
•056
•049
•059
37-985
149•936
•92860
113-647
51•168
72-595
'Compiled principally from Tablo C. in U. S. Geol. Surv., Monograph No. Xi.
3 Analyses by L'. M. Chatard, Am. Jour. Sei., sor. 3, vol. 37, 1888, pp. 116-150.
3 In 1869


94
Constituents.
Sodium, Na...
Potassium. K
Calcium, Ca
Magnesium, Mg
Lithium, Li.
Chlorine, CI
Bromine, Br
Carbonic acid, COz
Sulphuric acid, SOg.
Phosphoric acid, HPO,
Nitric acid, NOs
Boracic acid, BJ0,.....
Silica, SiO,..............
Alumina, 41,03.
Organic matter.
Hydrogen, in bicarbonates.
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON.
[BULL. 108.
Analyses of the waters of alkaline lakes in the arid region--Continued.
Pyramid
lake.
Nevada.
Sevier lake.
Utah.
Soap lake,
Washington.
1.1796
.0733
.0089
.0797
28. 840
10.504
.118
2.600
Trace
.011
1. 4300
45. 500
3.526
.4990
............•
.1822
9.345
0.625
4. 362
Walker
lake,
Nevada.
Winnemucca
lake,
Nevada.
.85535
Trace.
.02215
.03830
1.2970
.0686
.0196
.0173
.58375
1. 6934
• 47445
.52000
• 3458
.1333
.0334
3. 4861
86. 403
• 113
Much.
053
28.194
00750
• 0275
2.50150
3. 6025
The analysis shows that the water of Soap lake is a valuable brine
that may be utilized in the manufacture of sodium carbonate and
sodium sulphate. The first step to be taken in attempting to separate
these salts is to experiment on large quantities of the brine for the
purpose of ascertaining the best way of manipulating it. This can
be done successfully only by an experienced chemist. Natural soda
has been obtained on a large scale and for a number of vears from the
waters of the Ragtown ponds (Soda lakes), Nevada, and Owens lake,
California. The methods there employed have been minutely described
by T. M. Chatard,' and should be studied by any one intending to
utilize the water of Soap lake.
NoTF. -The small percentage of calcium carbonate in solution in Soap lake is of •
interest for the reason that tufa is now being deposited from its waters through the
agency of plaut life. Near the south shore of the lake, where the water is about 2
feet deep, there are many branching and exceedingly irregular coral-like forms ris-
ing from the bottom to a maximum height of 14 or 16 inches. They are formed of
cellular calcium carbonate, and are covered, even to the tips of the many spire-like
branches, by a thin layer of living bright green and brown algous growth. The in-
terior of these masses is composed of thin white lamine of calcium carbonate,
among which there has been a secondary deposition of the same material, thus
cementing the blades together or covering the walls of the cells with small excres-
cences. No organic structure could be detected in the tufa when examined under
the microscope.
It has been pointed out by Weed in an exceedingly instructive paper on the hot
spring deposit of the Yellowstone park (Ninth Aun. Rep. U. S. Geol. Survey, 1887-
'88) that both calcareous and siliceons deposits are there being made from heated
water by fresh water alg. This process is thought to be due to the vital action
of the plants, which abstract carbonic acid from the waters and thus lead to the
I Natural soda, its occurrence and utilization. In Bulletin No. 60, U.S. Geological Survey; Wash-
ington, 1887-1888.


RUSSELI..]
LIME DEPOSITED BY ALGAE.
95
precipitation of the calcium carbonate which was previously in solution as the bi-
carbonate.
The coral-liko masses, with a green and brown epidermis of living algo, rising
thickly over portions of the bottom of Soap lake, are good evidence that calcium
curbonate is there being abstracted from the water through tho agency of plants, in
a manner similar at least to the processes by which siliceons and calcareous scinter's
are being deposited from the waters of hot springs.
The origin of the oolitic sand now forming in Great Salt lake have recently been
referred to the action of algro by Rothpletz. (Am. Geol. vol. 10, p. 279.)
The agency of algre in separating calcium carbonato from dilnto solutions is a
matter of great geological siguificance, especially to thoso interested in the ancient
lakes of the Great Basin. In Lake Lahontan, particularly, immense deposits of cal-
cium carbonato, or tufa, of various kinds were deposited. The manner in which theso
accunulations wero formed is not fully understood, and there now seems to be donbt
if the usually accepted explanation of the more common, and it was thought, leust
puzzling of the deposits is really the true one. In former reports [Quaternary History
of Mono Valley, U. S. Geol. Survey., Ann. Rep., pp. 188-222, and Monogruph No. XI,
U. S. Geological Survey], I suggested thad the tufa was depositeil in some instances
about sub-lacustral springs which rose in deuse waters, and in consequence of chem-
ical reactions parted with their calcim carbonate on coming in contact with the
waters in which they rose. This process seemed to be in action in Mono lake, where
largo sub-lacustral domes of tufa still have spring water pouring out of their sum-
mits. In referring to my notes I find that these domes are coated with green and
brown algous growths, very similar, as I remember them, to the living surfaces of the
tufa now being formed in Soap lake. At the time I visited Mono lake I was not
acquainted with the fact that alge play au important part in precipitating calcium
carbonates, and conoluded that the tufa does were simply a support for the vege-
table growths covering these surfaces, in the same way that rocks in the sea afford
anchorage for marine alga.
It now seems possible, however, that the mingling of the fresh water from the
springs with the denser solution in the lake, instead of resulting directly in the chem-
ical precipitation of tufa, supplies the conditions necessary for the growth of algi
which are able to separate calcium carbonate from dilute solution of thatsalt. The
springs bring food to the plants in the same way that currents in the ocean favor
the growth of corals and other marine invertebrates.
The deposition of calcium carbonate in Soap lake, unlike the similar occurrence in
hot springs, takes place at normal temperatures. How dependent the plants are on
the chemical composition of the water remains to be determined; it may be that
algo of various kinds flourish in water of different chemical character, und hence
the variation in the structure of the tufa deposited. The study of the calcareous
and siliceous deposits of the hot springs of the Yellowstone park has thrown a new
light on the question of tufi deposits generally, and suggests many inqniries that
it will be interesting to make in the lakes of the arid region. Even the formation
of "thinolite," another of the calcareous deposits found in the basin of Lake Lahon-
tau and in Mono valley, which chemists have labored in vain to explain, may perhaps
be profitably reviewed in connection with the part that algie play in the origin of
related accumulations.
The rugged cliffs overlooking Soap lake on the west, in which the strata
dip westward, mark a line of faulting. On the east side of the break
the wall is lower and the general inclination, although slight, is east-
ward. The lake occupies a fault basin, and in this and in other respects
has many counterparts in the arid region extending south from central
Washington, among which Abert and Summer lakes, Oregon; the lakes


96
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
in Surprise valley, California, and Walker and Pyramid lakes, Nevada,
are the most nearly analogous and the best known.
Moses lake, a few miles south of Soap lake and situated in the most
southern of the series of canyons which connect with Grand Coulee, is
supplied mainly by springs and is itself sufficiently fresh to be drink-
able. The walls of the canyon in which the lake lies are of stratified
Columbia lava and seldom rise more than a hundred feet above the
lake. No indications of faulting were there observed. At the south
end of the lake the canyon is filled with sand dunes which retain the
water, but allow sufficient to percolate through to form large springs.
'The water from these springs finds its way to Crab creek bottom and
after sinking and rising again several times finally disappears from the
surface. The water of the creek, except near where it finally disap.
pears, is fresh and wholesome.
Saddle mountain. -On leaving Crab creek bottom we crossed Saddle
mountain, and reached the Columbia at the northern end of the long
series of river cliffs known as White bluffs. Saddle mountain, as pre-
viously mentioned, belongs to the series of monoclinal uplifts due to
faulting, which extend eastward from the foothills of the Cascades.
This long, narrow, sharp crested ridge is perhaps the most remarkable
of these uplifts, as it extends farther east than any of its companions
and clearly reveals its structure where the Columbia has cut through it.
The terminus of Saddle mountain at the west has not been traced,
but it is thought to be a monoclinal ridge starting in Kittitas valley
about 10 miles east of Elleusburg. If this identitication of the west
end of the ridge is correct its length to where it dies out and passes
beneath the undisturbed surface of the desert, cast of the Columbia,
is about 50 miles. Its height at Sentinel bluffs, where the Columbit
cuts through it, is about 1,600 feet above the river. It is there a well.
defined monoclinal ridge, dipping sharply southward and presenting a
bold scarp to the north. The dip of the strata of basalt of which it is
composed corresponds with the gently sloping southern side. The
line of fracture is on the north side of the ridge, and the steep northern
face is a fault scarp. Toward the eastern end the fault scarp decreases
in height and finally dies out, and the John Day beds pass over and
conceal the Columbia lava. The dip of the strata on each side of the
ridge toward its eastern end becomes about the same, showing that the
fault passes into a fold.
.
The presence of Jon Day beds interstratified with the upper sheets
of Columbia lava has been mentioned. These show conclusively that
the ridge was upraised subsequently to the deposition of the John Day
beds. In all of the features mentioned iu connection with Saddle moun
tain we find strict paralleis in other similar uplifts in Yakima and Kit.
titas counties, thus strengthening our interpretation of the general
history of central Washington.


RUSSELL.]
ORIGIN OF TOPOGRAPHIC FORMS.
97
That the climate of Douglas county must have been arid since Sad-
dle mountain was upraised may be inferred from the absence of drain-
age lines on its southern slope, where easily eroded lake beds form the
surface. Another interesting conclusion to which the history of the
mountain points is that Columbia river had its course established
before the mountain was upraised, and has maintained its right of way
by cutting a gateway 1,600 feet deep directly across the uplift. The
relation of the Columbia to Saddle mountain is the same as that of
Yakima river to several similar uplifts. The evidence that the main
drainage lines of central Washington were established before the pres-
ent relief was initiated, is cumulative and abundant. The rivers began
to flow when lake John Day was drained, and had their courses deter-
mined by the slope of the surface of the bottom of the old lake. Since
then mountain ranges have been formed by faulting, but the larger
streams, i. e., the Columbia and Yakima, were able to cut down their
channels as rapidly as the ridges were upraised athwart their channels.
It may be that the draining of Lake John Day was due to the beginning
of the orographic disturbances which afterward deformed its basin.
• Volcanoes were active during the existence of the lake as is shown by
the abundance of volcanic dust and lapilli in its sediments. From field
observations as well as from a microscopical examination of the sedi-
ments it seems safe to assert that more than half of the John Day sys-
tem is composed of volcanic dust. This material is highly siliceous and
differs widely from the basic lava beneath.
The country sloping south from Saddle mountain to the Columbia
is a desolate, sagebrush-covered region, occupied in part by drifting
sand, and has been but lightly sculptured by rain or streams. There
is one deep canyon-like valley in the lake beds, however, which starts
near the east end of Saddle mountain and leads to the Columbia. This
is clearly an ancient drainage channel, but its individual history has
not been traced.
White bluff's on the Columbia.-'The conspicuous white bluffs along
the left bank of the Columbia, beginning 12 miles above Pasco and
extending 30 miles up the river, are formed by the edges of soft strata
of fine, thin bedded sand and clay with layers of pure white volcanic
dust, which were deposited as horizoutal sheets in Lake John Day and
have not since been disturbed. This is the most typical section of
John Day beds to be seen in Washington. The cliffs have a maximum
height of about 600 feet, but are in general about 500 feet high. The
river is still cutting away their bases at several points, and its general
tendency is still to work eastward, leaving a low, sand-covered plain
on its right shore. As suggested while describing Rattlesnake moun
tain, this remarkable eastward shifting of the Columbia may perhaps
be due to a movement of the rocks to the east of Rattlesnake fault.
Bull. 108.
-7


98
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. [BULL. 108.
The character of the loose unconsolidated material forming these
bluffs is shown by the following section observed near this southern
end:
Light yellowish sand, loose and incoherent.
Hard cemented layer, light yellow, "alkali"
'Thin-bedded, yellowish, sandy clay, with thin yellow lines, weath-
ering into monumental forms, passing intr
Fine clay with volcanic dust
White volcanic dust!
Loose, fine yellow sand, changing to
Greenish clay, passing into
Yellowish sand, with concretions.
Yellowish sand, compact at base, cross bodded
Fine, light, sandy clay...
Pebbles, sometimes wanting . ..........
Light-colored, sandy clay, with large flat coneretions
Yellow sand, passing into clay, sometimes concealed by terraces of
• water-worn stones, to river
Feet.
20
.... 6-10
100
10
20
15
20
15
50
50
1
35
150
The dividing lines between the various beds above are not sharp, the
strata are conformable throughout and pass one into another by insen-
sible gradations. The strata were formed by continuous sedimentation
far from shore, and are remarkable on account of the immense amounts
of volcanic dust scattered through them.
On the face of the bluffs the fossil bones of large animals have been
found, but these have not been studied and their significance is not
known. Similar fossils from the exposures of the same system on John
Day river have been studied by Leidy, Marsh, Cope, and Bettany, and
found to present a strange array of mammals, all of which are now
extinct.. The White bluffs afford favorable ground for collecting fossil
bones and would, I think, well repay careful search.
In all of our examinations of the Johnday system we never found a
fossil shell which could be referred to them. This absence of molluscan
remains is remarkable and probably points to some peculiar condition
of the old lake. An examination of a few samples of the sediments
of the lake also failed to show the presence of diatoms or other minuto
organisms. It is possible that the waters were warmed by the immense
beds of lava beneath them and perhaps charged with gases from the
same source. The immense quantities of volcanic dust that fell in the
lake may also have rendered it unfavorable for animal life. These are
"The volcanic dust in this section and occurring also at many other localities is
purice which has been blown to powder by the expansion of steam which it con-
tained at tho time of its eruption. It is highly siliceons, practically insoluble, and
could probably be used for many of the purposes for which diatomaceous earth
(tripoli) is now employed. It will probably bo found of service in polishing wood,
stone, bone, and ivory, and metallic articles, and could be utilized in the mana-
facture of certain kinds of soap. Experiments should be made for the purpose of
ascertaining whether it can be employed as an absorbent for mitroglycerine in the
manufacture of high explosives.


RUSSELL.I
ABSENCE OF SHELLS IN JOHN DAY SYSTEM.
99
only suggestions, however, as the absence of life gives nothing but nega-
tive evidence on which to base hypotheses. The shores of the lake were
bordered by a varied and beautiful flora, among which many strange
animals found congenial homes; their bones were sometimes swept into
the lake, and, sinking to the bottom, became entombed in its sedi-
ments. Why the lake itself should have beqn so barren in life while
its banks were luxuriautly clothed and abundantly inhabited, is oue
of the perplexing features of its history.'
Our field work ended at Pasco, adjacent to the region in Yakima
county, which was traversed during the early portion of the season.
Our work was closed because no more funds were available for continu.
ing ii, but covered suficient territory to show that the state of Wash-
ington has a most interesting geological history.
Absence of artesian basins. Much of the central and southern por-
tion of Douglas county is arid and desert-like and crops are impos-
sible without irrigation; the higher and more productive region about
Waterville, where light crops of wheat are now grown, would also be
greatly benefited, could water be supplied. The soil throughout the
country is deep and rich, and, where not too alkaline, would yield abut-
dantly if the one element lacking could be furnished. These conditions
have led the people of Douglas county to hope that their lack of water
might be supplied from artesian sources. My examination of the county
does not favor this hope, however, and I have failed to find that the
county contains any artesian basins.
The springs throughout the county are supplied by the local rainfall.
No fissure springs deriving their supply from deep sources were ob.
A few species of fresh-water and land mollusks have been described from the
John Day system in Oregon, by C. A. White (U. S. Geological Survey, Bulletin No.
18, Wishington, 1885), and shown to be closely related if not identical with species
still living. This is such a remarkable announcement that additional information
is seemingly required before it can be considered as fully established.
In searching for fossils in the John Day system it should he remembered that the
same basin his also been occupied by a Pleistocene lako, and that the sediments of
the Tertiary and of the moro recent lake might easily be confounded. The hones of
fossil mammals in the Tertiary lako might, in some instances, have been washed out
of the sediments in which they were originally entombed and redepositerl, together
with recent shells in the clays and sands of a younger water body. As in illustra-
tion of this, I may mention that at the southern end of the White bluffs, about 15
miles above Pasco, I found a number of spocimens of large fossil bones derived, with-
out question, from the John Day beds, in a recent river terrace which was banked
against a cliff formed of the edges of horizontal strata of the John Day system. The
strata in tho terrace were horizontal, and to all appearance in most places extended
beneath and formed the lower portion of the cliff against which they had been
deposited. The deception in this case was so complete that at first there seemed no
question but that the sand and gravel containing the bones were of the same age as
the strata in the cliffs above, and it was only after several hours of search that I
succeeded in convincing myself of their recent deposition.
Future discoveries of fossil shells in these rocks are to be hoped for and would be
particularly interesting if they sustained the conclusion already advauced.


100
A RECONNOISSANCE IN CENTRAL WASHINGTON. (BULL. 108.
served during our reconnoissance, although they may occur along the
various lines of fracture. Even if copious fissure springs should be
found, it would not follow that they derive their supply from artesian
basins, in accordance with a prevailing supposition. On the contrary,
fissure springs are fortuitous in their occurrences and depend ou the
existence of breaks in the rocks which give direction to underground
waters, but are so irregular that it is impossible to trace them. Fis-
sure springs arising from an artesian basin would be unfavorable to the
hope of obtaining flowing water from borings rather than favorable
signs, for the reason that they would indicate & fracturing of the im
pervious layer above a water-bearing layer, and thus tend to destroy or
counteract the very conditions on which the storage of water in porous
strata is made possible.
CONCLUSIONS IN REFERENCE TO ARTESIAN WATER SUPPLY IN THE
REGION EXPLORED.
The reconnoissance described in the preceding pages has shown that
the geological structure of the region traversed is in general unfavor-
able to the hope of obtaining artesian waters. The principles govern-
ing the flow of artesian wells and the characters of the rocks in the re-
gion visited, as well as the attitudes in which the strata occur, have been
described in order that the reader might see for himself the reasons on
which this adverse conclusion is based, and be enabled to review the
question for his own satisfaction in the locality in which he is especi
ally interested.
As has been shown, the arid country in central Washington is under-
lain by a thick sheet of basalt composed of mauy layers, above which
there was formed a heavy deposit of clay, sand, and volcanic dust. These
two widely spread formations were originally horizontal, but are now
broken by many lines of fracture, some of which are scores of miles in
length; the blocks between the breaks are tilted in various directions
and their edges in many instances upturned into mountain ranges. Itis
evident from the general structure that any great artesian basin would
have been broken and destroyed by the mountain building that has
taken place. A broad artesian basin beneath the basalt and extending
from the Cascade to the Rocky mountains is for these reasons not to be
expected.
When the basalt and the deposit of lake sediment resting on it has
been bent upwards so as to form basins, the conditions favoring the ex-
istence of underground water under pressare may exist. The possibly
water bearing strata in these local basins lie above the basalt, but may
have thin sheets of basalt interstratified with them. The bending up
of the strata so as to form local basins is of rare occurrence in the por-
tion of the state which has been examined, and when it has taken place
other conditions may still render it impossible that the basins should
hold water under pressure. When the basins are perfect in general


RUSSELL.)
GENERAL ABSENCE OF ARTESIAN BASINS.
101
form they are sometimes broken by fractures, or channels have been
ent across their rims by drainage which is inconsequent to the struc-
ture. When such a drainage channel occurs the stratified beds within
the basin of basalt have sometimes been completly removed. Small
basins in the more arid portion of the state, which have escaped these
various accidents, would not receive water enough from the limited
rainfall to be of commercial value.
With these various limiting conditions in mind, I feel that the reader
who has the patience to read the preceding account of the geology of
central Washington will agree with me that, with one or two excep-
tions, the conditions are there unfavorable to the hope that artesian
water can 'be obtained. The exceptions are Moxee valley, where the
existence of a small artesian water supply has already been demon.
strated, and possibly the eastern part of the Yakima Indian reserva-
tion, where, as suggested in a previous page, the conditions are such
as to justify further inquiry. In the remainder of the region examined
I do not consider that further expense in drilling wells is warranted.




APPENDIX.
REPORT ON FOSSIL PLANTS FROM NEAR ELLENSBURG, WASHINGTON.
By F. H. KNOWLTON.
The leaves from near Ellensburg, Wash., are preserved in a moderately soft white
chalky matrix, that is in general very similar to the well known material from the
auriferous gravels of California, and the Jolm Day valley in Oregon. 'The matrix
is a little harder than that from other localities mentioned, but is very well fitted to
preserve plant remains.
Notwithstanding the seeming abundance of the material, I find that more than
half of it belongs to a single species, and the whole number of species that I have
been able to determine is only ten. They are, however, well preserved, and are
numerous enough to make the determinations reasonably certain. I give first a list
of the species, followed by somo biological annotations, and finally a brief disens-
sion of the light they seem to throw on the question of age.
List of species.
Salix varians Güpp.
Popolns glandulifera Heer.
Populus Russelli, sp. nov.
Alnns sp. 9
Umus californica Lax.
Ulmus pseudo-fulva Lx.
Platanns dissecta Lx.
Platanus aceroides? (Güpp.) Heer.
Paliurus Colombi Heer.
Magnolia lanceolata Lx.
ANNOTATIONS.
Salix varians Göpp. -This species is represented by n great number of specimens,
embracing, as stated above, more than half of the entire collection. 'This is undonbt.
edly the same as the specimen figured as this species by Prof. Lesquereux,' from
Table mountain and Corral hollow, California, the only differences being that many
of the leaves are larger and somewhat more ronnded at the base. I doubt very
much whether this is the real S. varians of Heer from the Swiss Miocene, although
some of the smaller leives closely approach some of those figured by Heer.° They
seem rather to be intermediate between this species and some of the smaller leaves
ofS. macrophylla Heer (op. cit., p. 29, PI. IXvu). As I said, I wonld not incline to regard
it as identical with the Enropean plant, but as it is the same as the leaves so named
by Lesquerenx from two localities in California, it is snficient for the present pur-
posc. It will probably be best to give it a new name when the subjeet is finally
worked пр.
1 Cret. and Tert. Floras, p. 247, Pl. Lv, Fig. 2.
3 FI. 'Tert. Helv., 11, p. 26, PI. LXV.
103


104
APPENDIX.
BULL. 108.
Populus glandulifera Heer.- There is only one specimen that I refer to this species,
and it is not therefore entitled to great weight. This species was found by Lesque-
reux in the Van Horn's ranch material, in the John Day valley.
• Populus Russelli, sp. nov. There are several very finely preserved leaves of what
seems to be a new species of Populus. The leaves are broadly deltoid, with an ex-
ceedingly long, sleuder acute apex. They are wedge-shaped at base and have the
margins provided with regular, shallow teeth. The petiole is long and flattened as
in several living species. This species has close relations in the European Miocene,
but is perhaps most closely related to the living P. halsamifera var. candicans, the
well-known balm of Gilead.
Alnus sp.'-There are one or two leaves evidently belonging to this genus, but
they are not well enough preserved to admit of positive determination. They may
possibly belong to A. Kefersteini Ung., a species detected by Lesquereur in speci-
mens from Van Horn's ranch.
Ulmus californica Lx.-Based on a number of well preserved and satisfactorily
determined specimens.
Ulmas pseudo-fula Lx.-The specimens representing this species are not so
numerons as those of U. californica, but they are fairly well preserved and the iden-
tification made certain.
Platanus dissecta L‹.-'The collection contaios a considerable number of well-
preserved leaves of this species. They agree closely with those figured by Lesquerenx
from the auriferous gravels of California, and their identification may be regarded
as positive.
Platanus aceroides (Göpp.) Heer.-O ne or two leaves are referred to this species
with hesitation. 'They are very similar to leaves so named by Lesquereux from Van
Horn's ranch, but the real status of this species, as well as the closely related if not
identical P. Guillelma Göpp., has yet to be worked out.
Paliurus Colombi Heer.-There is a single leaf referred to this species, and only
one was found by Lesquereux in the Van Horn's ranch material.
Magnolia lanceolata Lx.-This species is represented by a single leaf, but as it is
a fairly good one, the identification may be regarded as certain.
One specimen is
also reported by Lesgnereux from Van Horn's ranch.
Of the ten species enumerated, seveu, among which are the species most abu-
dant in specimens and the most positive in identification, have been found in the
auriferons gravels of California. Seven of the species have also been reported from
the John Day valley, Oregon, of which number three are common to the auriferous
gravels. 'The new species (Populus Russelli) has great affinities with Upper Miocene
species of Europe.
•
From this examination it appears that there can be no doubt but that the plants
from Ellensburg are similar in age to the auriferous gravels and the John Day val-
ley. The John Day valley deposit has always been called Miocene. The auriferous
gravels, on the other hand, were regarded by Lesquereux and others as Pliocene,
but a recent examination of that flora based on extensive collections from Indepen-
dence hill, Placer county, California, seem to indicate that they also are probably
upper Miocene in age.
The plants from the auriferous gravels are mainly endemic and have no known
distribution in general outside of these beds. The only way of determining their
value in settling the question of age, is by a careful comparison with similar floras
in other parts of the world. This work has not yet been exhaustively done, but so
far as general resemblance goes, as well as by what has recently been worked out
regarding their stratigraphy, it is altogether probable that they are Upper Miocene
in age.


INDEX
A.
Page.
Analyses of waters of alkaline lakes in arid
region..................
Artesian basin of Moxce valley
temperature of water in.
extent of......
92-95
59, 60
59
60
•Artesian reservoirs, influeuce of north and
south undulation on formation of..
Artesian water, canses of failuro to obtain.
Assure supply of.
popular fallacies regarding
of' the John Day beds
30
34
35
35,36
36
unfavorable conditions in Colmbia
plain for obtaining
in Yakima valley
at Fort Simcoe..... . . . ... ... . ... ...
39
50,59
51
in Selah valley, impossibility of obtain-
ing....
.......
in Naches- Wenas valley platenu
61
63
in Umptanum ridgo region
in Kittitas valley
BO
in Douglas county
........83, 84, 99, 100
in central Washington, conclusions
reference to.
..100, 101
geological structuro of the region in-
favorable for....
...100, 101
in Moxee valley .
101
in Yakima Indianreservation.....
101
Artesian wells, conditions controlling
32-36
depth of.
36
of Atanum-Moxee basin
55-60
in ride sonow................
57, 58
of Moxee valley, quantity of water to
be derived from...
in Kittitas valley
Atanum valley
Atannm-Moxee basin
60
69
54
55
John Day beds
artesian wells of
55
B.
Basaltic sheet in Okanogan valley
reference to Willis,
Base• ever erosion.............
Big Bend coutry, description of
89
89
G8
17, 7?
C.
Cascade mountains, structure of.
Central Washington, principal crops of
provinces of....
glacial records of .
conclusions regarding artesian water
supply in
. 15,30
18
19
25
..100, 101
Page.
Central Washington- Continued
geological structure of, unfavorable for
artesian water ...........
...100, 101
Chatard, T. M., analyses of waters of
lakes of arid regions by
.. 93,94
Chelan crossing.
... 86-88
Chelan river.
80
Chelan valley, terracey of
80
moraines of ..
80
Clarke, W. T., indebtedness to.
57
Climato of Donglas county
97
Coal near Wenache
76
Columbia basalt of Kittitas system .....
67, 68
Columbia canyon above Saddlo mountain
74
near Waterville
78
Columbia lava
.20-22. 25, 43
of Selah valley
..54, 60, 61
of Wenas creck
of Kittitas valley
.68, 71, 75
of Okanogan county
of Douglas county
termination of.
83. 84
74, 75
of Saddle mountain
Columbia river. course of . . . . . ...18. 83.97
desert character of parts of conrso of... 74. 77
great terrace of.
18. 88
moraine terracos o
79
Couleo city…..
90-92
Coulees, Great plain of the Columbia
21.22
of Kittitas valley, history of
73
Srmons on
92
lakes in ..
92-96
Cowiche creek.
64
Crab creek....
72,73
Crab creok bottom
96
Crops of central Washingtou............
18
Crystallino rocks of central Washington.
20
origin of
D.
Diller, J. S., quoted on hypersthene andesite
of lava flow near aches bridge..
Douglas county
irrigation of
artesian water in.
Columbia lava...
John Day beds of
climate of
drainago of.....
absonco of artesian basins in
absenco of fleuro springs in
.. 64, 65
..83-100
.83-84, 85
.. 83,84
83, 84
84
97
97
.99.100
..00, 100
105


. 106
INDEX.
Drainage system of Okanogan county.
of Douglas county
Page.
16, 77
97
Page.
K.
E.
Ellensburg, exposures near
F.
Fissure springs, Moxee valley.
absence of, in Douglas county
Fort Simcoe, artesian water at
reservoir sites for irrigation at
Fossil bones from White bluffs
Fossil forests near Fort Simcoe
of Umptanum ridge region
Fossil leaves of Kittitas valley
Fossil mammals in Tertiary lake of John
Dav srstem ... ... ....
mar...
Fossil mollusks from John Day system,
description of, by White.
Foster creek …...
Foster creek canyon
basalt of
69, 71
59
.99, 100
51
51
.... 98,99
46, 47
67
70
99
Kiona, faults near
43
Kittitas counts.
67.68
lava cliffs of.....
67
Kittitas system, term proposed.
20
description of.
.20, 31, 67, 68, 75, 84, 85
Columbia basalt of
67, 68
Kittitas valley.......
68-71
John Day beds of .
68, 69
base-level erosion in
68
Columbia lava of.
68
artesian water in
69
reservoir sites in.
70
Klickitat river, conrse of
Konewock pass
52
99
87-89
• Lacustral period......
88
22
Lake beds of Selah valley
BI
88
Lake Chelan…...
..74, 76, 78, 79-83
G.
history of the outlet of
79.80
Gable hills.
G6
description of..
80-83
Geological lakes in arid regions......
33
Lake John Day, sediments of.
23
Glacial record of central Washington.
25
cause of draining
97
volcanic dust in
Glaciers in Okanogan county
77
98
Lake Lewis.....
in Douglas county
77
.25-27, 80
Lako terraces of Chelan valley
SO
Grand conlee.
..87, 88, 89, 90-96
Lakes in coulees…..
92-96
glacier of.
. 91, 92
description of.
90,91
Lava flow in Yakima county
history of …...
91
Level-floored valleys......
31
Lowlands of the Columbia.
38
Great glacier from Okanogan valley ...... 87, 89
Great plain of the Columbia, desert charac-
M.
ter of...............
Great terrace of the Columbia.
78
Marsh, O. C., quoted on Miocene lake in
Gold mines of Okanogan county
.... 76, 77
northern Oregon.................
24
Miocene of northern Oregon, Marsh on....
24
н.
Monoclinal folds
29.30
Higgins bottom springs.
40
Monoclinal ridges.....
.28, 29, 42
Horseheaven plateau
..28, 42-44
Moraine terraces, Columbia river.
79
well on....
44
Chelan valley
80
improbability of obtaining artesian
Moraines of Chelan valley
80
water from strata of
14
Moses coulee.
73.92
Moses ake...................****".
96
• I.
Mount Adams, height and character of
15
Mount Steward .........
71
Irrigation from surface streams
19
Mount Tacoma, clevation of
0. 5 7
Irrigation of Douglas county.
.... 83,84
Moxce valley ......
..53,54, 55
T.
John Dav beds of .
53
supply of artesian water in
58
John Day beds.......
...36, 39, 41
artesian basin of
59
of Selah valley...
54
nssure springs of ........
59
artesian water of
36'
artesian waters, smpply in
101
of Yakima valley
..50, 51, 52
of Moeo valor.......
..53, 59, 60
of Atanum-Moxee basin
55
artesian water in.
55
of Umptanum ridge region
GG
Naches valley…...
John Day beds of
Naches river
61-65
63. 65
of Douglas county
84
0.
of Saddle mountain
96
John Day river, fossils from
98
John Day system
22-25
deposition of
volcanic rocks of
.......
absence of molluscan remains in
98
Okanogan county ...
general relief of.
drainage system of
rocks of.
gold mines of
_.........16. 76-83
16, 77
76. 77
76, 77


INDEX.
107
Okanogan county-Continned.
Columbia lava
aucient glaciers ill ....
Okauogan river, course of
Okanogan valley, great glacier from
basaltic sheet in
Page.
Storrow, Samnel, acknowledgments to :
77
Structural features summarized
77
Subsurface water in Moxeo valley
18
Supply of artesian wells in Moxce valley.
. 87,89
Symons, Thomas W., acknowledgments to.
89
Lake Lewis named and mapped by.
on couleos..
Page
. 13, 55
31
60
58
14
20
92
P.
"Pictured rockg"
Placer mining in gravels of Schwak creck.
Plateau between Naches and Wenas valleys 61, 02
section exposed in
64
68
. 61, 62
G3
63
64
G4
Temperature of water in Mosee valley wells
'Tertiary lake of Jolm Day system, fogeil
mammals in.
Test. wells in Yakima valley
J'iaton river.
'Topinish creck.
'Lopinish landslide...
59
artesian water in..
Platen on right bank of Naches river
molten rock of ......
description of hyporsthene andesito
01
by J. S. Diller.
Pleistocene lake.............
Pumpelly, Raphael, acknowledgments to ..
R.
. 64, 65
91
14
UT
Umptanum ridge.....
Umptamum ridge region
John Day beds of
basaltic racks of
Rainfall in Yakima valley
50 Union gap.
Rattlesnake fault
.38, 39, 40, 41
courso of..
41,42
Rattlesnake mountail.........
.28, 38, 40-42
Reservoir sites west of Fort Simcoo
51
in Kittitas valley
70
Reservoirs of artesian water, influence of
Volcanic cones of Cascade mountains.
Volcanic dust in Lako John Day
Volcanic mountains.
north and sonth undulations on for.
mation of.
30
50,51
63, 64
48
...47.48
. 66, 67
6G
66
67
29,51
15
98
31
Washington Irrigation Company's well.
57
S
Waters, analyses of... . ........ . ..... ...... 92-95
Saddlo mountain.
conformation of
John Day beds of
Colmmbia lava
Sand dunes
Satas creek
section exposed in canyons of
Satas ridge, elevation of.
course and character of
, 72,96
16
96
96
38
44
. 44, 45
15
, 45, 47
Water-bearing beds, changes in character of 32, 33
manner of changing.
.39_35
Waterville.
..77, 85, 86
wells near.....................
85
rainfall and irrigation in region about. 85,99
Well at base of Rattlesnake mountain.
39
at Pasco . . . . . ...
39
Wells near Waterville
85
Wenache.....
84
Wenache mountains
71
monoclinal structuro of
Wenache river
76
landslides of …...
47
Tenas creek
63
Schwak creck.....
67
placer mining in gravels of.
68
Wenas valley. ....
61-65
John Day beds of
GI
Seudder, H. B., indebtedness to..........
55*
Section near southern end of Whito Blufts.
98
Whito, C. A., description by, of molluscan
fossils from John Day system re-
Section of wells passed through in drilling 56,57
ferreil to
Sclah ridge.
53, 54
White bluffs.
Sola valler…....
..51, 60, 61
section near sonthern end of.
John Day beds of
54, 61
Columbia lava of
54.
fossil bones.from ......
practical absence of Jolin Day beds in
61
Wido Hollow, artesian wells in
impossibility of obtaining artesian
Willis, Bailey, acknowledgments to
09
97
98
98,99
57,58
14
map of conntry about Mount Bonaparte
water in
Simeo landslide.
Snipes mountain
SoAn ake .....
analysis of water of.
GI
47.48
.48, 49,59
92
92-95
by, referred to.
Woke Cumtux coulee.
89
... 72,73
combarison of water or with water of
other lakes in arid rogion.
..........93-95
Springs in plateau near month of Grand
coulee..
Steiger, George, analysis of water by
90
93
Yakima canyon ......
baso-level croyion in
Yakima county . ...
reconnaissone0 O
coal of .
65, 66
68
37_67
37
37


108
Yakima county -Continued.
agricultural wealth of
drainageof.
Yakima hydrographic basin.
Yakima Indian reservation, artesian water
supply in .....
Yakima Land Company' wells.
Yakima ridge..
origin and structuro of....
INDEX.
Page.
37
35
30
101
55-57
51-53
52, 53
Page.
Yakima river..
........38, 49, 54, 65, 66, 68, 70
importanco of, for irrigation purposes.
17
Yakima valley....
49-51,59
John Day beds of.
50
conditions for obtaining artesian water
rainfall in..
test wells in
50
50
50, 51
