VOLUME XXXVIII
NUMBER 5
THE
JOURNAL OF GEOLOGY
July-August 1930
VALLEY DEPOSITS IMMEDIATELY WEST OF THE
CHANNELED SCABLAND
I HARLEN BRETZ
University of Chicago
ABSTRACT
If a "Spokane Flood" ever occurred, and if the valley system of eastern and central
Washington was already in existence, these valleys must have become channels and
abnormal deposits of great magnitude must have been formed. This paper calls at-
tention to such deposits along the western margin of the scabland-both in Columbia
Valley, a main discharge route, and in Yakima Valley, a capacious tributary valley
entering from an area unaffected by the flood. Three extraordinary situations are
given especial attention: the mouth of Moses Coulee, the Columbia Valley depo:its
near Trinidad, and the truly astounding features in lower Yakima Valley. The con-
clusion is reached that nothing short of a catastrophic flood can explain these features.
Skepticism can be justified only by the construction of workable alternatives.
The loess-mantled basalt plateau of eastern Washington pos-
sesses a system of linear anastomosing denuded tracts, the channeled
scabland, in parts of which the basalt has been trenched in most
unusual fashion. The writer has interpreted these linear tracts as
abandoned river channels, rather than river valleys. From features
of the anastomosing pattern, it was concluded also that most of the
channels were contemporaneously occupied. These two ideas re-
quired the assumption of a volume of stream water greatly exceed-
ing anything known elsewhere. Other data seemed to indicate that
the great rivers were born suddenly, operated for a very brief time,
and then abruptly ran dry. The term "flood" has been used to
express this conception.
Doubt of the correctness of the writer's interpretation was early
385
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


386
J HARLEN BRETZ
expressed, and several alternatives were suggested for the various
peculiar features and combinations of features of the channeled
scabland. In a paper considering these alternatives,' the writer
noted that the flood hypothesis was not to stand or fall on data
then in hand; that it could be critically tested by further field study.
Certain relationships in unexamined areas must exist if it be correct
and could not exist if it were incorrect. This paper deals with these
relationships along the western margin of the main tract of chan-
neled scabland. The areas considered are the Columbia Valley from
Wenatchee River to Yakima River and the lower part of Yakima
Valley.
COLUMBIA VALLEY FROM WENATCHEE TO THE
MOUTH OF MOSES COULEE
In the paper above noted, it was stated that if the flood
hypothesis is correct, Columbia Valley above the mouth of Moses
Coulee must contain one of two types of record: (a) that of
vigorous southward flow of an enormous glacial river whose surface
descended from the edge of the ice to an altitude, at the junction,
of from 60o to 700 feet above the present valley bottom, or (b) that
of a backwater ponding produced by the great scabland rivers enter-
ing Columbia Valley at, and south of, Moses Coulee. If, on investi-
gation, "neither of these exist, the hypothesis is fundamentally
wrong."
The writer, after study of this part of the valley, concludes that
neither record is present.
Obviously, the flood hypothesis must now be abandoned or the
ultimatum must be retracted. If the latter alternative be followed,
some special explanation must be devised for the absence of a flood
record up the Columbia from the mouth of Moses Coulee.
No ingenuity is required to construct this special explanation on
the basis of field evidence unknown when the ultimatum was made.
Wenatchee River, draining from the high Cascades, enters the Co-
lumbia about 15 miles upstream from the mouth of Moses Coulee,
and Columbia Valley between these two tributaries carries an un-
mistakable record of glaciation. Moraine topography extends down
1 "Alternative Hypotheses for Channeled Scabland," Jour. Geol., Vol. XXXVI
(1928), pp. 193-223, 312-41.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 387
the Columbia virtually to the entrance of the great coulee. Except
that it is pre-Wisconsin, the age of this glaciation is unknown. To
save the flood hypothesis, it is only necessary to assume that the
glaciation was contemporaneous with, or subsequent to, the flood.
The critical reader may object that advantage is being unfairly
taken of gaps in our knowledge. The writer's reply is to counsel
patience until the entire paper has been read.
The major features of Columbia Valley between Wenatchee and
the mouth of Moses Coulee are determined by two formations, the
Swauk shale and sandstone beneath the resistant Columbia River
basalt. The dip is eastward, in the direction the river flows but more
steeply. Thus the river has a wide valley in the Swauk formation
for about 10 miles downstream from Wenatchee, overlooked on the
north and south by converging basalt escarpments from 1,700 to
1,800 feet high (Fig. 1). About 5 miles above the mouth of Moses
Coulee, the base of these escarpments comes down to river level
and the valley thence downstream for many miles is narrow and
deep, with precipitous walls of basalt. Rock Island Rapids is a mile
or so within this narrow valley.
Rising westward with the dip, the contact of basalt on sandstone
and shale, 7 or 8 miles west of Rock Island Rapids, comes up about
1,800 feet above river level. Here the steep cliffs of Columbia
basalt above the contact are 2,000 feet high and the Swauk outcrop
below, 4 or 5 miles wide, is marked by landslide topography, par-
ticularly on the south side of the river. There is no possibility of
mistaking this landslide topography for moraine. But over the lower
500 or 600 feet of the Swauk outcrop area, foreign boulders and
cobbles are not uncommon, though none were found with glacial
markings. In the vicinity of Malaga and Mud Lake, from 7 to 8
miles below Wenatchee and on the south side of the river, good
moraine topography is superposed on the lowest of the landslip
features. The local relief of the moraine deposit itself is about 30
feet. As a mantle or thick smear, it extends from a flattish morainic
terrace for 125 feet up on the landslide forms, culminating in a
definite lateral moraine ridge 300 feet above the river. On the north
side of the river, opposite Malaga, the morainic topography begins
about 200 feet above the river and rises northward through 400
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


388
I HARLEN BRETZ
@COLUMBIA
BASAI
Lo.
COLUMBIA
BASALT
FIG. 1.-Malaga Quadrangle, Washington, United States Geological Survey
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 389
feet of altitude to a plain of outwash sand and gravel at from 1,200
to 1,250 feet A.T., 300 feet higher than the moraine on the south
side and approximately as high as the foreign cobbles and boulders
on that side. The outwash plain here is about a mile wide and slopes
gently northward away from the moraine toward the lower exposed
slopes of the Swauk. Some of the morainic ridges and associated
linear undrained hollows are well shown on the Malaga sheet of the
United States Geological Survey. They extend along the slope
somewhat like landslip forms, but can hardly be confused with such.
The maximum relief between a ridge and its associated sag on the
uphill side is 125 feet.
The morainic topography downstream in the basalt-walled valley
occurs only on the floor. The local relief between hillocks and
adjacent undrained sags is about 30 feet. A stratified valley fill
beneath the moraine consists in part of well-varved clay. The
morainic débris is hardly so feet thick where shown in section just
south of Rock Island Rapids. From this place the general moraine
surface rises about a hundred feet in the next 2 miles downstream
and there, without terminal ridging, ends abruptly against, or ap-
parently against, an enormous deposit of débris at the mouth of
Moses Coulee, a deposit higher than the moraine and of quite differ-
ent character.
Though the upper limit of morainic material in this part of Co-
lumbia Valley is not sharply marked, present data indicate that it
descends about 450 feet in to miles. The river in that distance,
including the rapids, descends less than 50 feet.
The composition of these morainic forms near Malaga is not the
physically heterogeneous stony and bouldery clay commonly termed
till. Instead, the material is gravel, the fragments worn by running
water instead of glacial ice and the finer constituents simply filling
voids among the pebbles, cobbles, and boulders. Some sections
show a poor stratification and sorting. It looks as though glacial
ice had encountered great quantities of river gravel in this stretch
and had re-worked it to make a morainic material largely devoid of
clay and without evidence of glacial abrasion. Similar very gravelly
moraine has been seen in the Rocky Mountain Trench at Polson
and in the Purcell Trench north of Lake Coeur d'Alene, both places
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


390
J HARLEN BRETZ
affording the possibility of glacial re-working of large stream-
gravel deposits.
The content of basalt in this gravelly waste changes remarkably
along the valley length considered. Near Mud Lake and Malaga,
basalt constitutes from 30 to 35 per cent of the material. Three
miles farther downstream, in the lee of some basalt hills that appear
to be huge slide blocks out in the valley, the moraine hillocks are
littered with large fragments of that rock, and 2 miles still farther
downstream (at the rapids) the morainic débris is 85 per cent basalt,
Whether this ice came down the Wenatchee or Columbia valleys.
or both, is not yet known. The first alternative seems most likely.
Whether it was contemporaneous with the great scabland-making
episode or was later is not yet determined. It seems, however, to
provide a logical explanation for the absence of any record of
Spokane Flood waters above the mouth of Moses Coulee.
COLUMBIA VALLEY AT THE MOUTH OF MOSES COULEE
A huge flat-topped mound of coarse detritus stands out in the
middle of Columbia Valley at the junction of the great dry valley
of Moses Coulee, the westernmost of the scabland river channels.
The Columbia here is crowded against the west wall of the valley
and confined to a narrow trench 350 feet below the highest part of
the mound.
The mound occupies two-thirds of the valley width. Its summit
area is triangular in outline, the highest part constituting an acute
angle pointing up the Columbia Valley (Fig. 2). From this summit,
its surface descends so feet per mile toward the south and southeast
to the ravine draining out of Moses Coulee. But both sides of the
acute angle are steep bluffs, the northeastern one descending about
50 feet to the moraine and the western one descending 350 feet to
the Columbia. The western bluff is certainly river-cut. The north-
eastern bluff is either river-cut or an ice-contact slope related to the
glacier that came this far down the Columbia. The gentle southern
and southeastern slope is constructional. The mound summit is
350 feet above the river, 10 feet above the lowest place between it
and the rock wall to the northeast, and about 150 feet above the
ravine to the southeast.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 39I
" BRINGHA.
Fic. 2. Junction of Columbia Valley and Moses Coulee; part of Malaga Ouad.
rangle, Washington, United States Geological Survev.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


392
J HARLEN BRETZ
There are no rock outcrops in the 350-foot western bluff or in the
ravine from Moses Coulee. The material is apparently coarse gravel
and boulders from top to bottom. Wells farther up Moses Coulee
show corresponding depths of gravel below a floor approximately
as high as the mound summit.
This mounded deposit, standing nearly in the middle of Columbia
Valley at the mouth of Moses Coulee and undefended by any rock
knob, is far higher above river level than any other deposit out in
the valley for many miles upstream. It is alone as a mid-valley
mound of débris; all other deposits in such position are terrace
forms.
A plausible suggestion is that the location of the deposit is in
some way related to the mouthing of Moses Coulee. Wenatchee
Valley is comparable to Moses Coulee in width and depth, but there
is no such deposit in the master valley at its mouth. Perhaps,
therefore, different events in these two tributary valleys are indi-
cated. Since Moses Coulee drains only from the basalt plateau,
débris derived from it should be predominantly basaltic (though
glacial ice on the north edge of the plateau might contribute some
non-basalt). Columbia Valley receives drainage from a great va-
riety of rocks, and its débris should be exceedingly varied. This
criterion seems worth applying to the great mounded deposit.
Columbia River gravel now in transit rarely shows basalt higher
than 5o per cent. This is true well below Moses Coulee, in the nar-
row basalt-floored and basalt-walled valley. No nearby tributaries
from non-basalt areas are responsible for this proportion; it is due
to non-basaltic débris brought down the Columbia past the mouth
of Moses Coulee. Gravel of older terraces of Columbia Valley about
Wenatchee and upstream show perhaps one-fourth basalt. The
same proportions hold for the younger terraces, probably Wisconsin
in age.
But the great mound is from go to go per cent basalt! This
startling fact indicates clearly that the deposit consists almost
wholly of débris from Moses Coulee, and that Columbia River has
contributed little or nothing to it. If one considers again its re-
markable proportions and its location out in mid-valley, it is diffi-
cult to escape the conclusion that Columbia Valley has been almost
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 393
completely blocked here at some time by very coarse débris from a
now dry tributary canyon. It is not difficult to visualize a complete
temporary blocking and to devise criteria by which that idea might
be tested. If the Columbia's trench along the west side of the
mound has been cut 350 feet deep in an originally continuous fill of
basaltic débris, there might be remnants still lingering on the west
side of the river, remnants identifiable by altitude, composition,
and structure.
Two minor tributary valleys from the west enter the Columbia
opposite the great mound. Both contain valley-mouth deposits of
gravel which have obviously caused relocation of the stream
courses on buried rock shoulders. Both streams enter and cascade
through short, steep-walled gorges within half a mile of the Colum-
bia. In both, the deposit is limited to the valley mouth; it does
not extend back up the tributary.
The deposit in the valley of the southern tributary, Colocham
Creek, reaches 1,000 feet A.T., 75 feet higher than the summit of
the mound across the river. That in Dry Gulch is about 100 feet
above the mound summit. In both, the débris is from go to 99
per cent basalt. This would be expected in tributaries draining,
as these do, entirely from basalt country. But in both the foresets
dip back into the mouths of the tributary valleys, out of the Colum-
bia and toward its western wall. These features seem to require
some special explanation; they should not exist in Columbia River
gravel deposits.
A further anomalous feature is found in the shapes of the gravelly
fragments. In contrast with Columbia River gravel, which is well
worn, most of this débris is sharply angular. Extraordinarily thin
blades and long jagged slivers of basalt are very common. Rounded
surfaces are present, but most fragments possessing them also have
some sharp, hackly, fractured surfaces in addition. Such pebbles
show clearly that they were originally rounded, were then broken
by sharp blows, and promptly thereafter came to rest. The sharp-
ness of fractured outlines of both broken-round and wholly angular
fragments absolutely debars the idea of ordinary travel along any
watercourse after the breaking.
The deposit in the mouth of Dry Gulch extends as a terrace-like
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


394
J HARLEN BRETZ
form about a mile farther north along the Columbia Valley wall,
its surface descending nearly 100 feet in that distance. This is as
difficult to explain as a Columbia Valley feature as are the items
already listed. It is perfectly in harmony with the picture of a
great deposit from Moses Coulee blocking Columbia Valley. It
needs only foreset bedding with dip up the Columbia to make it
complete. Unfortunately, no exposures of its structure were found.
Higher than this terrace are fragmentary remains of gravel deposits
dominantly non-basalt. These seem to record much earlier Colum-
bia River gravel, antedating even the last zoo feet of erosion into
basalt, all of which occurred before the basaltic gravel deposit was
made.
If one again takes stock of the data to see what other credit items
for the Spokane Flood hypothesis should exist here, he finds that
erosional forms apparently recording such an extraordinary episode
are reported for Moses Coulee alone. He asks logically for scabland
features on the west wall of Columbia Valley here, produced by the
great flood which is hypothecated for the deposits. That scabland
exists. It lies between the two tributary valley mouths and below
about 1,250 feet A.T. A flattish basalt ledge here, a mile long and
about half a mile wide, has been swept clean of mantle rock,' and
the bare basalt has been notably roughened into crags and buttes
and rock basins that show well on the Malaga sheet. A steep cliff
rises back of this scabland ledge, a cliff which clearly is a truncated
shoulder, formerly rounded and much less steep. Except for this
cliff, virtually all slopes above 1,250 feet have a graded waste cover
and are marked by normal drainage forms.
Moses Coulee has been pictured in the writer's earlier papers on
scabland as a preglacial drainage line heading about 50 miles to the
northward on the plateau and amazingly eroded later by glacial
waters. A great ragged, dry cataract, 400 feet high and I mile wide,
crosses the coulee about 20 miles above its mouth; huge bar-shaped
gravel deposits occur throughout a vertical range of 300 to 350
feet on the greatly scoured lower slopes; and a major tributary,
Douglas Coulee, entering the main canyon about 16 miles above
the mouth, hangs 350 feet above the gravel floor and 550 feet above
1 Deposition of dust and disruption of basalt have started a new mantle.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 395
the rock floor at its point of entrance. Many minor hanging valleys
are shown on the Malaga sheet. Much of this hanging condition of
tributaries, which surely were adjusted to the preglacial valley floor,
appears to be due to sapping of the coulee walls and consequent
widening by glacial waters."
The relation of this Moses Coulee discharge to the valley glacier
that once reached down the Columbia to the coulee mouth needs a
few more words. So far as altitudes and topographic relations are
concerned, one might picture the great mound as outwash material
from this glacier, the accumulation having been built up from 50 to
100 feet higher than the morainic topography immediately behind
it. The sag northeast of the mound summit might be considered a
spillway from this ice. But by such an origin the great mounded
deposit would have a large proportion, if not a dominant amount,
of non-basalt in its débris and its imbricated and foreset structures
would be directed down, not across, the Columbia.
It can hardly be argued that a Columbia Valley glacier extending
down to this junction would yield so little water that Moses Coulee's
normal share of the ice sheet's drainage across the plateau would
have given it complete dominance over the Columbia discharge.
There must be added to the coulee discharge a very great supply
from some extraordinary source.
The history of Moses Coulee, therefore, appears to include an
episode of tremendous discharge of glacial water down through a
canyoned tributary to a Columbia Valley as deep then as now, re-
markable cataract development and recession during the life of the
enormous discharge, remarkable widening to make of the pre-exist-
ing valley an adequate channel for the glacial river, bar-building
on a scale known elsewhere only in the channeled scabland of the
Columbia Plateau, and the making of a mammoth bar completely
* The 400-foot cataract, however, records at least that amount of deepening im-
mediately downstream from it. The cataract probably became higher as it receded.
It began, therefore, somewhere near the junction of Douglas Coulee, as a relatively
minor affair. Francis Canyon, shown on the Malaga sheet, does not hang above the
gravel fill of Moses Coulee, but a dug well in mid-coulee a mile distant penetrated 300
feet of gravel without finding bedrock. Francis Canyon, therefore, does hang at least
about 300 feet above the true bottom of Moses Coulee. Its gradient, projected to mid-
coulee, would not be too feet below the surface of the gravel fill
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


396
J HARLEN BRETZ
across the Columbia Valley at its mouth. That a long series of
Pleistocene episodes was not involved in making these great changes
(though other Pleistocene events have undoubtedly occurred here)
is argued from the following items:
1. Douglas Coulee, which never received glacial water of any
great amount, is a normal valley for the region and hangs far above
the main coulee. Had interglacial stream erosion been an important
factor in the deepening and widening of Moses Coulee, this tributary
would not hang. The erosion in Moses Coulee, therefore, was done
by glacial water.
2. Hanging tributaries, if by any chance the result of interglacial
stream erosion along main drainage lines, would exist in Douglas
Coulee, Rock Island Creek, and other canyons of the region.
3. A long-continued aggradation in Columbia Valley at the mouth
of Moses Coulee would have mingled débris of the master stream
throughout. The basaltic content then would have been about
5o per cent instead of from go to 99 per cent.
4. Foresets in the great deposit and in its remnants on the west
side of the Columbia would not dip westward, as they do, across the
master valley if the Moses Coulee glacial river had not completely
dominated the Columbia at that time. Imbrication of the flattish
cobbles also indicates that the transporting current came from Moses
Coulee, not Columbia Valley.
5. Virtually the only identifiable Columbia River débris in the
remnants west of the river are the few rounded pebbles and the some-
what more numerous broken rounds. These are about 50 per cent
non-basalt. The sharply angular material is essentially all basalt.
No normal stream work produces such percussion-broken chips and
slivers, or breaks up its rolled forms in the fashion or to the extent
that these broken rounds record. The rounds and broken rounds
were probably derived from Columbia River gravel already on the
valley floor when the flood occurred.
COLUMBIA VALLEY BETWEEN MOSES COULEE
AND THE POTHOLES CATARACT
The great bar at the mouth of Moses Coulee was built largely
on the northern side of the glacial torrent. Its gentle southern
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 397
aggradational slope is the northern part of the glacial river channel
floor at the close of the episode. The gravel, therefore, was thrown
back up the Columbia 100 feet higher than it was left in mid-chan-
nel. The southern part of this subfluvial gravel deposit lies south
of the ravine subsequently trenched in the middle of the old channel.
Just south of the ravine, it rises from mid-valley to the base of the
eastern cliffs through a vertical range of from 100 to 125 feet. A
Fic. 3.- Vicinity of Trinidad, Washington. Parts of Colockum Pass, Washington,
and Quincy, Washington, Quadrangles, United States Geological Survey.
terrace in this slope looks a bit confusing to this interpretation and
will be dealt with later.
Four miles below the mouth of Moses Coulee, the Columbia turns
sharply to the east for about 3 miles and then, at Trinidad, resumes
its southward course (see Fig. 3). Northeast of the river, on the
inside of the first curve noted, a thick gravel deposit extends from
river level up to 1,100 feet A.T., a height of 550 feet. Nowhere does
it have terrace forms. That it is a bar deposit still retaining the
original form, except for obvious gullying, is shown in both topog-
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


398
J HARLEN BRETZ
raphy and structure. Its structure is one of the most remarkable
features to be reported in this paper.
The Colockum Pass map of the United States Geological Survey
shows the highest part of this great gravel deposit as a compound
lobate form depending diagonally down valley from the sharp turn
in the basalt wall north of, and above, the gravel. The highest place
in the deposit is a broad low mound half a mile long, lying nearly
half a mile out in the valley and separated from the base of the rock
wall to the north by a shallow fosse. On the north side of this mound,
the gravel is foreset up the Columbia. The location is ideal for an
eddy in a great stream filling the Columbia Valley from side to side
at this altitude, and this low mound and its structure can be ex-
plained only by the conception of an eddy.
But the truly remarkable structure of this bar deposit is found
in the riverward slope. The Great Northern Railroad has a large
pit here, the cut bank of which is 200 feet or so high. Throughout
this cut, the bedding dips down to the west, directly up the Columbia
and parallel with the upvalley slope of the bar itself. In several
places, there are lenses of short foresets in these dipping beds and
the foresets dip east, down the Columbia, and against the dip of the
gravel as a whole. They dip in toward the body of the deposit.
The writer has studied the structure of stream bars at every op-
portunity since he recognized these great scabland gravel mounds
as genetically the same. He has found that flood-time bars, which
become obliterated in large part before another flood and hence are
essentially new constructions of each flood, commonly show stratifi-
cation on all slopes parallel with those slopes. These bars, if prop-
erly placed, grow on the upstream side as well as laterally and down-
stream. Accretion on the upstream face thus produces inclined bed-
ding which dips upstream, descending against the direction of the
débris-bearing current. Unlike foresets, the material of such in-
clined beds has been moved up the slope.
The bar west of Trinidad, by this interpretation, was built by a
current coming down the Columbia Valley. The predominant ba-
saltic composition of all this banked-up gravel from Moses Coulee
down to Trinidad indicates derivation from the tributary coulee,
not the main Columbia Valley. Its change from very cobbly and
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 399
bouldery gravel to material of railway ballast grades is perfectly
logical. But to build this great deposit, a river must be sweeping
over the total range in altitude simultaneously. The central cur-
rent must be as deep as the bar is thick. If we measure from the
base of the pit to the summit of the bar, that stream was 350 feet
deep when the bar was growing on its upstream face. Up over that
slope, the current dragged débris and added it until an equilibrium
size for the eddy, or slacker place, in the current was attained.
00.
FIG. 4.-Diagram to show accretion on the upstream slope of a river bar and the de-
velopment locally of current foresets dipping with the current but against the general
structure and slope.
Locally, while sweeping gravel up this subfluvial slope, the current
made downstream foresets which show by their dip, their gradation
of material, and their decreasing amount of dip toward the lower
ends of laminae that the current undeniably was moving along and
up this slope (see Fig. 4). The central current was vigorous enough,
after bar accumulation had filled in the slacker places, to keep the
main channel from filling. Is there any other explanation for such
structure and topography of a river-gravel deposit?
Another very instructive section exists in a second large pit,
happily located at the downstream terminus of this bar deposit.
Only coarse sand and fine gravel are exposed, well stratified and
sorted. Here also the beds are dipping. But here the dip through-
out is inclined toward the east, down the Columbia Valley. There
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


400
J HARLEN BRETZ
are no current foresets in this; the dipping beds are more like long
deltaic foresets. This section is in the lee face of the great side-
channel bar, structurally, topographically, and texturally. It is not
possible to make a fan or a delta of the deposit. Nor is it possible
to make of it a series of accumulations during several distinct epi-
sodes of Pleistocene history.
The true vertical proportions of the bar, and therefore the maxi-
mum depth of the gigantic river debouching from Moses Coulee,
are somewhat in doubt. The base of both pit sections is about 250
feet above the river. To include this 250 feet in the bar would
hardly be justifiable in the absence of evidence below track level of
the same character as that above. The Columbia undoubtedly has
cut into the flood-gravel deposits. How much intrenchment has
occurred here?
A bit of evidence which seems to bear on this question is found
in West Bar, a terrace-like form from 150 to 250 feet above the river
on the inside of the second curve noted and extending 4 miles down
the Columbia below and across from the bar just described. The
surface of West Bar ranges through 100 feet of altitude and is re-
markably diversified with large hillocks of gravel. It completely
blocks the mouth of Tekison Creek Valley from the west and the
tributary has been forced to turn abruptly to the south and to go
around the lower end of the deposit to reach the Columbia. Seen
from viewpoints along the highway east of the river, the surface of
West Bar seems to be marked by great current ripples. Since the
top of the bar is at about the same altitude as the base of the pit
sections, it seems fair to consider West Bar a part of the actual bed
of the enormous glacial river at its closing stage. In such case the
Columbia has cut about 200 feet here since the episode closed. The
maximum depth of the river near Trinidad, by this view, was at
least 350 feet. Since the curve in the river channel was not shared
here by the western rock wall, the glacial current swung hard against
the base of that wall and there was no opportunity for building a
correlative of the thick side-channel bar that lies inside the first
curve.
An erosional record of the glacial flooding in Columbia Valley
near Trinidad should accompany the depositional record. Scabland
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 401
forms, being essentially channel features, are better shown on flattish
tracts than on cliff faces. We must look, therefore, for broader
ledges along the Columbia at altitudes sufficiently low to have been
overrun by the flood. Such ledges exist on both sides of the valley
south of Trinidad. Those on the west flank the mouth of Tekison
Creek Valley near the south end of West Bar. Here well-developed
scabland extends up to 1,250 or 1,300 feet, from 750 to 80o feet
above the Columbia. It consists of buttes, basins, and channels
etched out of a bare rock terrace (a very thin soil is forming in some
places and a definite scarp rising from 100 to 15 feet higher to the
west of the scoured bench. The scarp has a slope of about 27 de-
grees and truncates an older slope of about 12 degrees. Conspicuous
remnants of the older slope, completely mantled with waste, descend
toward the top of the steep scarp.
On the east side of the river is a very marked ledge of basalt, I
mile wide in places, extending 16 miles along the river and rising
from goo feet at the south end to 1,375 feet A.T. at the north end.
Most of it is shown on the Quincy sheet of the United States Geologi-
cal Survey. The writer has previously described the features of this
ledge, and they will be but briefly summarized here. The surface
bears strongly expressed scabland, associated with small bar de-
posits. But this scabland is significantly limited to that portion of
the ledge which lies below about 1,250 feet A.T. The northern and
higher part is totally lacking in the bare-rock surfaces, the buttes,
rock basins channels, and bar deposits of scabland. It also lacks
the very steep cliff overlooking it on the east. North of the scab-
land-marked part of the ledge, the cliff has gentle slopes and, like
the ledge, is mantled completely with soil. Whether one accepts
the flood hypothesis for the origin of scabland or prefers some alter-
native, he must admit that subsequent to the erosion of Columbia
Valley and the development of this marked ledge, some pronounced
scouring has occurred over that part of the ledge below 1,250 to
1,300 feet and has not occurred above that altitude. The great bar
deposit west of Trinidad is the highest known in this region. Though
it falls 150 feet short of reaching to the scabland upper limit, its
summit is higher than most of the scabland on the broad ledge.
Furthermore, a spur of basalt ⅓ mile north and a little west of the
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


402
J HARLEN BRETZ
1,100-foot summit of the bar has been eroded into a jagged crest
line at least too feet above the bar top. Closely associated with the
largest notch in the spur is a mounded heap of basaltic débris
thrown over into the ravine and interrupting its normal form. It
seems probable that if one accepts the flood hypothesis for the bar,
he must add the scabland-making to the episode and must therefore
think of a river 500 feet deep.
CRATER CATARACT, NEAR TRINIDAD
The western part of the Quincy sheet shows three abandoned
cataracts once used by glacial water escaping from Quincy Basin,
in the plateau scabland, and entering the Columbia. In each the
water above the brink reached essentially the same upper limit,
from 1,275 to 1,300 feet A.T., and they must be considered as con-
temporaneous in action. This altitude is also that of the highest
scabland on the broad ledge, and therefore no cataract spill could
have occurred when the highest part of the ledge was scoured.
Similarly, the scabland near the mouths of Colocham Creek and
Tekison Creek is almost as high as the river surfaces just above the
cataracts. The cataracts, therefore, must be a later development,
and two episodes of scabland-making by glacial waters seem to be
recorded. Several critics have urged the extreme improbability of
the view that all scabland channels were contemporaneously occu-
pied. Here is a critical place to test the idea.
Two of the cataracts (Frenchman Springs and The Potholes)
poured directly over the wall of Columbia Valley on to the broad
ledge, the deepest plunge pools (now dry) being 200 feet below the
surface of the ledge. The northernmost fall (Crater Cataract) en-
tered a tributary of the Columbia (Willow Creek Draw) about 2
miles upstream from the Columbia. It plunged from 1,200 to 1,000
feet A.T., and a flat-surfaced gravel fill at its base reaches thence
nearly 3 miles to Trinidad, descending 5o feet in that distance and
terminating in a bluff 400 feet high, now being undercut by the
Columbia. The material of the fill is well exposed in numerous sec-
tions. It is composed of dominantly basaltic débris, little worn,
ranging from sand to boulders but mostly a pebbly gravel. Its
stratification is essentially horizontal. No forest strata were found.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 403
The gulch of Willow Springs Creek trenches buried rock spurs in a
few places, but a creek valley as deep as at present existed here
before the fill was made.
The brink of this flat valley fill is 250 feet higher than the scarped
edge of West Bar 1 mile distant and 150 feet higher than the valley-
wall contact of this bar, 2 miles distant. Yet the brink is 150 feet
lower than the summit of the side-channel bar west of Trinidad.
The topography and structure seem to rule it out of the bar category,
yet its range in altitude includes that of the remarkable 200-foot
section with bar structure only 2 miles farther up the Columbia.
Its structure and cliffed terminus do not indicate a delta front; its
gently descending gradient seems to require that it once extended
farther out into Columbia Valley.
If this be true, the lower corrugated surface of West Bar, here
interpreted as channel floor of the bar-building episode, must be
younger. Yet the argument which ties the great bars into the epi-
sode of highest scabland-making requires Crater Cataract to func-
tion later and consequently the flat-topped Willow Springs fill to
be the younger.
There are almost no terraces in Columbia Valley or in the mouths
of tributary valleys for many miles upstream or downstream to use
in determining age relations of this Willow Springs deposit to the
bars. The only terracing of bar gravel known in the region occurs
about 1 mile below the mouth of Moses Coulee. Here a scarp from
75 to 100 feet high interrupts the aggradational profile of the gravel
deposit, the flattish tract below being about 850 feet A.T., 100 feet
lower than the brink of the Willow Springs deposit. This scarp
seems to be related to the Moses Coulee River, rather than to the
Columbia, and is probably a record of channel-shifting beneath the
stream surface in which the entire deposit was made.
The nearly complete absence of terraces on the bar profiles strong-
ly suggests that the Willow Springs deposit is a product of special
local conditions, and that it really belongs to the episode of tre-
mendous discharge of glacial water across the scablands. This inter-
pretation has at present no corroborative evidence to support it.
The cataract and the filling in Willow Springs Draw still constitute
a serious difficulty in the writer's interpretation of channeled scab-
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


404
J HARLEN BRETZ
land. The reader may consider that their existence disputes and
perhaps denies such interpretation. This cannot be done, however,
without a satisfactory alternative for the great gravel mounds and
for the type of record shortly to be described for Yakima Valley.
COLUMBIA VALLEY BETWEEN FRENCHMAN HILLS
AND SADDLE MOUNTAIN
Just below the southernmost of the three abandoned cataracts,
Columbia River crosses the east-west Frenchman Hills anticline, a
fold which lifts the surface east of the river an average of 400 feet
and a maximum of 700 feet. Twelve miles farther south the river
crosses another anticline, Saddle Mountain, parallel with French-
man Hills. Its summit averages 1,000 feet above the broad sag
between the two folds. An unnamed minor fold, about midway be-
tween these, lies in parallelism and therefore determines two minor
structural valleys in the broader one. These structures, transected
by the river, postdate its course. They strikingly controlled the
course of glacial drainage across this part of the plateau and there-
fore predate the inauguration of glacial discharge. If this is correct,
the Columbia Valley, throughout this stretch, and the structural
valleys, where favorably situated, should also bear the character-
istic erosional and depositional record. Examination has been made
only near the two highways in this region, and the data therefore
are fragmentary. The reader may judge whether or not they sustain
the thesis of this paper.
Scabland exists along this stretch. There are no such favorable
situations for its development as the broad ledge in front of the
cataracts, and upper limits are difficult to determine on cliffs. The
most prominent rock benches are in the transection of Frenchman
Hills anticline. On the west side of the valley, scabland extends up
to about 1,250 feet A.T. and has a youthful cliff back of it, like the
scarps above scabland already described. The basalt flows here dip
southward. If the cliff were the product of normal weathering and
erosion on flows of differing resistance, it would follow the dip.
Instead, this cliff retreats somewhat from the river and cuts the
weaker flows above the bench at progressively higher horizons while
maintaining its altitude. The scabland on the bench here is 750
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 405
feet above the river, yet very little subdued by the processes which
are breaking down the buttes and filling the basins. The bench
east of the river is about 1,200 feet A.T., very close to the upper
limit apparently, since a pronounced and unequivocal development
of channels, basins, and buttes is lacking.
At Vantage Bridge, 3 miles south of the transection of Frenchman
Hills fold, no good bench exists and scabland cannot be positively
identified above 1,150 feet on the cliffs.
The southern of the two minor structural valleys (now containing
lower Crab Creek) carried a great glacial stream from the plateau
to the Columbia, but, unlike the three spillways directly from Quin-
cy Basin, it had no waterfall. Scabland features in this syncline
at the base of the north-facing Saddle Mountain scarp have been
described in an earlier paper. It will suffice here to note that the
upper limit, determined about 12 miles back from the Columbia, is
1,100 feet A.T., though the preglacial structural valley there was at
least 200 feet and probably 400 feet deep at that place. Glacial
water was up nearly to 1,100 feet in the Columbia Valley to produce
this. A similar record of the upper limit is found in the master
valley for many miles downstream, yet there is indisputable evi-
dence of great current action in many places up to this level. A
current producing scabland forms of the magnitude of these, yet
without apparent gradient for many miles downstream from the
mouth of Crab Creek, is truly an extraordinary conception. Does
not the idea literally condemn itself at the outset? But if the reader
can be persuaded to read to the end of this paper, he will find that
the field evidence at the mouth of Yakima Valley is as extraordinary
as the conception, and that it will not permit any alternative of the
flood hypothesis yet proposed.
There is a better record of deposition than of erosion by the flood
water in Columbia Valley between the two anticlinal crossings.
The North Central Highway from Ellensburg to Spokane descends
into Columbia Valley from the west along Whisky Dick Canyon
and crosses to the east side of the valley on Vantage Bridge. Coarse
angular rubbly bar material lies as high as 1,000 feet A.T., 500 feet
above the river, in the re-entrant containing the tributary canyon.
It is mostly slope rubble collected locally, very little sorted, unworn,
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


406
J HARLEN BRETZ
poorly stratified, and very rudely foreset-bedded in places. The
foresets have various dips. Here and there the deposit contains
clean basaltic sand lenses from 1 to 3 feet thick. Non-basaltic
fragments are rare but present. They are most abundant near the
upper limit of the deposit. Much of the basalt is decayed, but there
is also fresh material intimately intermingled in all exposures. The
TUra
GRANT
KITTITAS
FIg. 5.- Columbia Valley just south of Frenchman Hills. From Quincy Quadrangle.
United States Geological Survev.
deposit of little worn local material constitutes a complete barrier
up to 700 or 750 feet, diverting the intermittent drainage off to
both sides of the fill. Its riverward front is a cliff 175 feet high, cut
subsequently by the Columbia. In form it suggests a huge fan
built in the mouth of the tributary (see Fig. 5). A fan of these
proportions, however, requires conditions that would be recorded in
many, if not all, other tributaries of similar size and character in this
stretch. No other tributary valley mouth deposits suggest fans.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 407
Furthermore, the structure is quite wrong for a fan; the deposit
contains material foreign to these basaltic slopes; and it extends
down the Columbia along the face of the basalt cliffs far beyond
the limits to which a fan from this valley could possibly grow. The
original slopes of the deposit still exist in large part and are well
shown on the Beverly sheet of the United States Geological Survey.
East of Vantage Bridge, the basalt cliffs are scored by many deep-
ly gashed ravines or gulches. Virtually all of them contain irregu-
larly disposed large mounds of angular bouldery and cobbly basalt
débris, several once completely blocking the gulches. Their loca-
tion prevailingly on the north sides of the gulches suggests that
they are not so much a result of eddying back from the swollen main
stream as of current sweeping across the spurs between gulches at,
and above, the level of the deposits. One such deposit directly east
of the bridge is 380 feet from base to summit. Its vertical range is
not its thickness in any one section, for it lies throughout on the
steep northern wall of the small coulee containing it. Original de-
positional slopes of these minor bars have been but little modified
by subsequent drainage down the steep gulches. Foreign rock frag-
ments occur in these deposits and scattered over the scabland sur-
faces up to about 1,150 feet A.T.
Sand Hollow, a small stream-eroded valley in the bottom of the
northern minor structural valley, enters Columbia Valley about
2¾ miles south of Vantage Bridge. A large bar occupies the flaring
mouth, constricting it below 1,000 feet A.T. to half the valley
width above that altitude (Fig. 5). The bar summit is 200 feet
above the valley bottom immediately upstream. Indeed, one must
travel half the total length of this drainage way before the rising
gulch floor is as high as this bar summit. The summit, moreover,
is essentially in the middle of the flaring mouth. Later drainage
has cut a narrow defile around or across the northern end of the
deposit. The narrow cut descends 100 feet in about 2.000 feet
horizontal, while above the bar the gradient is 35 feet a mile, about
one-fourth as steep as in the defile. The bar summit includes about
200 acres and, somewhat lower, extends down the Columbia a mile
bevond the mouth of Sand Hollow. Glacial water was up on the
adjacent slopes at least too feet higher than the summit of the bar.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


408
J HARLEN BRETZ
COLUMBIA VALLEY NEAR THE MOUTH OF YAKIMA RIVER
The great bar deposits in Columbia Valley for many miles south
of Saddle Mountain gap have been described in earlier papers.
Only one feature of this part of the master valley will be described
here. It occurs on the west slope of the valley close to the northern
base of the Rattlesnake Hills. The hills are the crest of a fold in the
2000
Yakima
- 3000-Atanu m Ridge.
2090
-10005
son.
Rattlesnake
Toppenish
asdler
•4300
Horse
1500*1000.
FIG. 6.-Lower Yakima Valley
Columbia basalt which trends northwest-southeast. The summits
are as much as 3,000 feet above the river. Traced southeastward,
the altitude decreases and the fold approaches close to the Columbia
at Richland and Kennewick. Yakima River crosses a low place in the
fold about 1o miles upstream from Richland. A dissected bench lies
along the northeastern side of the Rattlesnake Hills below the steep
descent from the crest. It abuts against the basalt fold at an alti-
tude of about 1,500 feet A.T., from 1,000 to 1,100 feet above the
Columbia. The bench is 1o miles long and from 2 to 4 miles wide
(see Fig. y). It resembles a piedmont waste slope as much as a
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 409
terrace. Its range in altitude in any cross-section is from 750 to
800 feet. No outcrops were found to show its true character, but
with this we are not at present concerned.
8049.
Mo uni
handier
FiG. 7.-Vicinity of the mouth of Yakima Valley. Parts of Prosser and Pasco Ouad-
rangles, United States Geological Survey.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


410
J HARLEN BRETZ
Over the lower part of this sloping bench occur mounds of glacial
débris from to to 20 feet high and 100 feet or so in diameter. A
dozen or more can be seen from almost any viewpoint on the north-
ern half of the sage-covered bench. There must be several hundred
of them on the slope. They are distinct constructional forms and,
in places, suggest a morainic topography, though there are no asso-
ciated undrained depressions, no ridge forms, and no cover of drift
on the tracts separating them.
These mounds are largest and most abundant below about 850
feet A.T. The slope above carries scattered foreign boulders up to
1,100 feet A.T. Above that altitude, glacial material is wholly
lacking.
The débris in the mounds is essentially a till. Striated and
smoothed surfaces are common on the fragments of fine-grained
rocks. The striae are mostly short and somewhat out of parallelism.
Not rarely they have slight curved or angular changes in direction.
The boulders and cobbles exhibit a highly varied assemblage of
rock material. Granite is the most common constituent. Slate,
argillite, and fine-grained quartzite are common also. The textures,
colors, thinness of stratification, fineness of grain, and presence of
mud cracks and ripple marks in these fragments suggest very strong-
ly that they came from the glaciated mountains of Beltian rock in
northern Idaho, northwestern Montana, and adjacent British Co-
lumbia. Another fairly common constituent is a granodiorite por-
phyry, identical in the hand specimen with berg-borne boulders of
,this rock in virtually every scabland channel on the plateau and
back up several tributary valleys along the east side of the scabland.
Very little gneiss was found, though in British Columbia, directly
north of this part of the scabland, gneiss is a very common bedrock.
Five of the six mounds examined in detail contained no Columbia
basalt, though a trip of at least 75 miles and perhaps 250 miles across
basalt country was necessary to bring this material here, and though
Rattlesnake Hills, wholly of basalt, are only 3 miles distant and rise
3,000 feet above the mound-marked area. Derivation from ice on
any part of the plateau seems debarred. So does mingling of local
rock waste subsequent to deposition. Yet in one mound Columbia
River basalt was very common. If it did not come from the waste
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 41I
of Rattlesnake Hills, it appears that some ice which melted here
did contain Columbia basalt.
It seems obvious that these scattered mounds of till are great
berg deposits. It seems probable that the bergs came across the
scabland from the northeast. If so, they traveled at least 250 miles
to reach this place. The abundance of the mounds indicates large
numbers of bergs. The bulkiness of the mounds seems to bespeak
bergs of enormous size.' If they were river-borne, great streams
were required to transport them. Great abandoned glacial water-
was from the northeast exist. Are they channels or valleys? If
channels, were they ever filled with the enormous streams the writer
conceives of? Is it only coincidence that the upper limit of this
berg-borne material here is the same as that of the stream-eroded
scabland in lower Crab Creek Valley, lower Snake River Valley, and
Washtucna Coulee? These striking mounds on the northeast flank
of Rattlesnake Hills cannot be dismissed from the problem of chan-
neled scabland.
If these deposits are correctly interpreted as berg-laid, they must
not be limited to this sloping bench in Columbia Valley. The in-
terpretation here advanced is supported by isolated patches and
mounds of berg-deposited till in many places throughout the plateau
scablands and even in Columbia Valley beyond the scablands.
Erratic boulders, which are more common, must mean the same
thing.
It is significant that the United States Bureau of Soils map of
Benton County, Washington, shows an abrupt change from one
soil type to another on this bench along the 1, 1oo-foot contour line.
The subsoil profiles, as described, are notably different; that above
1,100 feet being unstratified and essentially pebbleless, while that
below this altitude is stratified and with foreign pebbles, cobbles,
and boulders common. The examination necessary for such a mod-
ern soil map is far more detailed than was the writer's reconnais-
sance. The map shows the same contact at the same altitude in
Yakima Valley south of Rattlesnake Hills and, at a somewhat lower
1 If the larger mounds are as thick as they are high, 5,000 tons is not too great an
estimate of the weight of débris in one of them. If its true weight is only one-tenth of
this, a berg so X50X so feet in dimensions would be required to float it.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


412
J HARLEN BRETZ
altitude, 75 miles farther down the Columbia. The berg-floated
débris of south-central Washington does not occur above 1,100 feet
in the extensive low area where Yakima, Snake, and Walla Walla
rivers enter the Columbia.
This item is essential to the appraisal of an alternative hypothesis.
Berg transportation does not require river currents. Bergs may
drift widely in standing water. Such a submergence has been de-
scribed for this region' with the statement that its upper limit was
about 1,250 feet A.T. That altitude is attained farther north in
Quincy Basin and the Columbia Valley west of it, but the region
about the mouths of the Snake and Yakima seems to show, on re-
study, that no berg-floated material occurs above about 1,100 feet.
Consistently throughout the scabland region, the upper limit of
erratic boulders is higher farther up the valleys. Yet this increasing
altitude cannot be due to subsequent warping for three reasons.
(I) A theoretical "unwarping" to bring all upper-limit erratics to
a common level would almost completely remove all gradient from
the valleys which contain the floated boulders, and which therefore
are older than the berg-drifting. (2) Such warping to explain the
rising gradient of upper limit must be regularly distributed along
many rather diversely oriented glacial drainage ways. No causal re-
lations for this seem thinkable, and coincidence seems a very far-
fetched idea. (3) Tributary valleys which received backwater from
the scabland do not show any upstream rise in upper limit of erratics.
Warping, therefore, affected only the tracts used by glacial waters.
This explanation is far from satisfactory.
If the field facts justify a conclusion, it is that the upper-limit
gradient of berg deposits is associated genetically, and not by coin-
cidence, with the corresponding upper limit of loessial scarps, scab-
land, and bar gravel. Nowhere in the region have these berg de-
posits been found too high to belong to the group.
YAKIMA VALLEY
There is no region more favorably situated than lower Yakima
Valley (Fig. 6) for a crucial test of the flood hypothesis. It enters
1 J Harlen Bretz, "The Late Pleistocene Submergence in the Columbia Valley of
Oregon and Washington," Jour. Geol., Vol. XXVII (1919), pp. 489-506.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 413
the Columbia more than 6oo feet below the upper limit of the berg-
drift débris. For 70 miles above the mouth, it is a capacious struc-
tural valley, the folding of which antedates the highest records of
the flood in the adjacent Columbia Valley. The point must not be
missed that its floor has been aggraded, rather than degraded, by
Yakima River since the valley was made and therefore that no
high-level features in it can be ascribed to early stages in valley
deepening. Unlike Columbia Valley above Moses Coulee mouth,
lower Yakima Valley has not been glaciated. If the Spokane Flood
occurred, this valley must have received a very marked back-rush
into it from the main route of flood discharge. An unequivocal
record of such a back-rush is a vital requirement of the hypothesis.
Yakima Valley is especially significant as a test because it was not
studied at any time during the development of the hypothesis, and
therefore no part of that scheme was ever constructed to take care
of whatever features it might contain.
As important as the structural origin, capacity, and low altitude
of Yakima Valley is the fact that it is structurally constricted at its
mouth by the convergence of the Rattlesnake upwarp on the north
and the Horse Heaven upwarp on the south. At the significant
altitude of 1,100 feet A.T., the valley narrows from an average of
15 miles to only 3 miles, at the station of Chandler.
Not alone does this narrowing constrict the valley cross-section,
but a minor fold on the southern slope of the Rattlesnake Hills,
shown in Figure 7, averaging perhaps 100 feet high, actually crosses
over to the Horse Heaven flexure through the Chandler Narrows.
Thus, in addition to the narrowing, the floor of the synclinal valley
is raised at this place.
In further preparation for an understanding of Yakima Valley's
record, the reader should note that the lowest place in the rim of
the structural valley, by which glacial water backing up from the
Columbia might conceivably have escaped is 1,476 feet, 376 feet
higher than the 1,1oo-foot upper limit repeatedly referred to. With-
out an escape, the flooding back must come to a standstill by the
time the valley is filled. Any up-valley current which might be
recorded in Chandler Narrows could have existed only while the val-
ley was being filled.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


414
J HARLEN BRETZ
Except for the flood plain and low terraces, the floor and lower
slopes of Yakima Valley are buried beneath a heavy deposit of
pebbly, gritty silt, generally poorly stratified and sorted, and in
places without stratification or assortment. It is identical in all
respects with the deposit mantling the lower part of the bench with
the berg mounds (the soil map shows it as the same soil type),
mantling the slopes of Walla Walla Valley to the same limits, and
ESSACE-
4000
Glen
FIG. 8. -Chandler Narrows within the 1,100-foot contour
except, as to altitude, lying on the slopes of Snake River Valley
and many minor valleys upstream from the scablands. Samples
taken from many places show the same amazing proportions of all
grade sizes from silt to fragments too large to collect, boulders in
size. Boulders of Beltian rock and of the granodiorite porphyry are
here. Bruises and glacial markings are common; subangular shapes
are the rule.
Yet this anomalous sedimentary mantle does not go above about
1,100 feet A.T. either on the valley slopes or upstream along the
valley length. Another structural enlargement, 30 miles north of
Yakima (the Ellensburg part of the valley, 1,500 feet A.T. and high-
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 415
er) is totally lacking in the glacial deposit. This fact rules out the
obvious alternative that valley glaciers once occupying the Yakima
headwaters contributed the glacial silt. It came into lower Yakima
Valley from the Columbia; it was transported upvalley.
The details of the Chandler Narrows must now be examined.
Figure 8 shows the minor fold across the structural narrows, its
ise.
Glen
Fig. o.-Chandler Narrows scabland
crest descending below 1,100 feet 1 mile north of the river. Closely
paralleling it on the northeast is a normal erosional valley, conse-
quent on the maior structural slope. The crest of the minor fold
below 1,100 feet bears a curious topography, wholly unlike anything
else on the fold or on any other surfaces of the district. A closer
view, magnified from the Prosser topographic map of the United
States Geological Survey (Fig. 9), shows ten irregular undrained
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


416
J HARLEN BRETZ
depressions irregularly distributed among a number of hillocks.
One of the depressions is more than 10 feet deep (the two inner
lines, though unhachured, are depression contours) and immediately
adjacent to it is a hill 1o0 feet high, giving a total relief of more
than 200 feet in about 500 feet horizontal. Another cliff, more than
150 feet high, rises from the bottom of the largest depression.
This curious irregular topography ranges along the crest of the
fold from 950 down to 60 feet above sea-level, from 450 feet above
the river to only too feet above. It looks like a group of sand dunes
or kame piles enclosing associated depressions or a cluster of sink
holes. But it is none of these.
FIG. 10.-Rock basin 100 feet deep in Chandler Narrows scabland
The map alone will not solve our problem. Field examination
yields the important information that the material fashioned into
these sharply expressed holes and hillocks is basalt. The holes are
rock basins; the hills are ragged eminences of tilted basalt flows.
The problematical topography is an erosional topography in the
crest of the fold below 950 feet A.T. (see Figs. 10 and I1).
Figure 12, a cross-section of Yakima Valley at Chandler, shows
six different profiles: (1) the irregular topography of the crest of
the fold with five rock basins in black; (2) a restoration of the origi-
nal surface of the fold, drawn along its length; (3) the general struc-
tural slope alongside the minor fold; (4) the profile of the consequent
tributary valley parallel with the fold; (5) the erosional valley of
Yakima River in the bottom of the larger structure: and (6) the
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 417
upper limit of the glacially derived material in Yakima Valley. The
floor of the deepest basin (more than 100 feet deep) is 200 feet below
the crag on one side, 250 feet (or nearly so) below the crag on the
other side, and only 125 feet above the river. Excavation for the
highest rock basin started 450 feet above the present river level
and 275 feet above the structural valley floor. All basins lie in
gashes cut essentially across the fold. One is cut as deep as the adja-
cent tributary valley and another one is almost as deep, though both
are on the structural divide.
These features are scabland features, as great a departure from
normal erosional features as anything on the plateau. Scabland of
FIG. 11. Dipping flows of the minor fold in Chandler Narrows scabland
lesser magnitude goes somewhat higher on this slope, but not quite
to 1,100 feet. Chandler Narrows contains all the scabland there is
in Yakima Valley, and it is significantly limited to the crest of the
low fold which stood in the Narrows. Yakima River began trench-
ing 275 feet below the uppermost of these rock basins and avoided
the fold in all of its work. It cannot be held responsible. Local
drainage has avoided the fold, cutting its valleys alongside, not
across. One may well ask, "Is this truly erosional topography?
May it not be due to collapse of lava caverns? May it not be the
result of explosive vulcanism? If it is erosional, was running water
the agent?"
The answer can be given from other data. The minor drainage
ways down the southern slope of Rattlesnake Hills, from Corral
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


418
Proflle of Neighboring Tributary Valley
Upper Limit of Erratic Boulders
650
Restored Surface of
Anticline
Valley through Chandler Narrows.
Rock basins in black
12. Cross-section
J HARLEN BRETZ
Canyon on the east to Snipes Creek on
the west (see Fig. 7), contain heavy
deposits of little-worn gravel on their
eastern sides, burying the rock walls and
narrowing the valleys. The western walls
lack the gravel deposits. In Corral Can-
yon, 32 miles east of the rock basins
and buttes, the gravel deposit extends
for 1 mile along the east wall and ranges
from 70o to 8o0 feet A.T. In Snipes Creek
Valley, 42 miles west of the scabland
tract, this gravel buries at least  mile
of the eastern wall and ranges through
175 feet vertically, reaching close to 1,000
feet A.T.
These gravel deposits, well exposed in
excavations, are extraordinarily boulder
in places. The boulders, cobbles, and
pebbles are dominantly of basalt, very
little worn to wholly angular, clearly
shifted but little from the source and pos-
sessing an intimate mixture of weathered
and fresh basalt throughout the total
thickness. The weathered material was
alread altered before deposition oc-
curred. The source vielded boulders of
weathered basalt. Talus might have such
a composition; so might glacial drift; but
an agent which rolls its débris would
soon destroy such fragments or their
weathered exteriors. Sparingly distrib-
uted through the coarse basaltic waste
are unweathered fragments of granite
and well-rolled quartzite pebbles, derived
locally from a gravelly member of the
Ellensburg formation.
This gravel is foreset-bedded through-
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 4I9
out in every exposure. The foresets without exception dip up Yaki-
ma Valley, away from Columbia Valley to which the Yakima is
tributary. The action of flowing water is recorded, but its direction
of flow was exactly the reverse of normal. The foresets (Fig. 13)
are not long deltaic beds, but very irregularly disposed and inter-
rupted and cut off by overlying foresets.
More gravel deposits exist among the scabland knobs and basins
of Chandler Narrows. Here they occur as separate moundings on
FiG. 13.-Foreset-bedded gravel on east wall of Corral Canyon, Yakima Valley,
looking north.
the lee (upvalley!) side of buttes, in the rock basins and blocking
subsequent drainage on the slopes of the group. One such bar stands
40 feet high in the bottom of the deepest rock basin and is composed
largely of boulders which range up to 3 feet in diameter. Some bar
forms stream upgrade westward out of rock basins and even beyond
the eroded fold. There can be no reasonable doubt that the scabland
and the gravel deposits of Chandler Narrows and vicinity are genet-
ically associated. Little doubt need exist that the anomalous peb-
bly, sandy silt farther up the valley is also genetically associated.
That the berg deposits up to 1,100 feet, both on the Rattlesnake
Hills bench and throughout Yakima Valley, are a product of the
same episode seems a perfectly fair conclusion. All of these features
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


420
J HARLEN BRETZ
point to a source outside of Yakima Valley and a reverse current
moving up the valley.
Lest one still hesitate to admit that these extraordinary phenom-
ena demand the extraordinary origin imputed by the writer, let us
examine another narrows in Yakima Valley; one which should have
the same kind of a record if the glacial water and débris came down
the Yakima Valley, and which should not have them if the writer's
hypothesis is correct. This place is the Yakima Canyon between
Yakima city and Ellensburg. Here the river has cut from 1,000 to
1,500 feet deep across several folds in the basalt to escape from the
FIG. 14. Yakima Canyon between Ellensburg and Yakima (from Professional
Paper 19, U. S. Geological Survey).
Ellensburg structural valley and to enter the lower Yakima struc-
tural valley. The canyon is shown in the northwest corner of Figure
6, and a portion of it is shown in Figure 14. The narrowness is more
pronounced than at Chandler, and this, with the winding course,
should offer a much better opportunity for tremendous scour than
does the Chandler constriction. But both the map and the sketch
show no scabland whatever. All slopes are normal for a valley of
this kind, steep cliffs outside the curves, virtually all slopes clothed
with creeping waste, rock outcrops very limited, no gravel bars, no
stream gravel at all except at the bottom, and that gravel occurring
only in terraces. Much of the gravel exposed along the highway
cuts possesses a reddened upper zone.
Whatever happened at Chandler Narrows never happened in
Yakima Canyon. The floor is above 1,100 feet!
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


VALLEY DEPOSITS WEST OF CHANNELED SCABLAND 421
We have thus far reached the following conclusions:
1. The scabland on the minor fold in Chandler Narrows is a
product of aqueous current along the major structural slopes.
2. The current action was subsequent to the trenching of Yakima
River and its tributaries into the structural forms.
3. The current moved up Yakima Valley.
4. The current was tremendously effective at 950 feet, 450 feet
above the present river.
5. No glacial water reached higher than 1,100 feet in Yakima
Valley, 376 feet below the lowest place in the rim.
The capacity of Yakima Valley west of Chandler Narrows and
below the 1,1oo-foot contour is 3.17 cubic miles. If there has been
but one flooding of the valley with glacial water, that is the total
quantity which, passing through Chandler Narrows, produced the
features which have been described. The Columbia in maximum
flood discharges 1,170,000 second-feet past The Dalles, about 150
miles down the river from the entrance of the Yakima. If such a
flooded Columbia could be diverted into the mouth of Yakima
Valley (by a blockade, let us suppose, in the Columbia canyon be-
low the Yakima junction), it would fill Yakima Valley to 1,100
feet in about four and a half days. Any current so produced would
be an uphill current, its velocity dependent on a surface gradient
only and constantly decreasing as the cross-sectional area of the
rising water in the Narrows increased. Since, however, Walla Walla
Valley would also fill at the same time (it has the same records up
to the same altitudes), the time for filling would be considerably
longer than indicated in the foregoing, and the velocity would be
correspondingly decreased.
What does the Columbia do today with this maximum flood over
the same kind of rock, with a surface gradient of 20 feet to the
mile? It has a velocity then of at least 15 miles an hour, perhaps 20
miles. The rate of erosion has not been determined, but that it is
infinitesimal, compared with the erosion at Chandler Narrows, is
obvious. Four and a half davs of maximum flood past The Dalles
have never made observable changes in the channel.
Only by tremendous velocity could a current from Columbia
Valley produce these great erosional effects in Chandler Narrows
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms


422
J HARLEN BRETZ
by a single flooding. Such a velocity, if conceivable, can exist for
only a small fraction of four and a half days. The only conceivable
way to get these results by water flowing 450 feet above the river
along the slopes of a structural valley 2 miles wide at this level is to
allow an advancing wall of water, like a gigantic bore, to sweep
through the Narrows. Only thus can this vertical range of rock
basins of similar magnitude, plucked out of the anticlinal crest, be
produced.
Would anyone care to argue for more than one flooding to do this
work? The field evidence does not debar that. But no sum of less
vigorous floodings, even though they reach as high, will explain the
rock basins and the mounded bars. Enormous velocity is a pre-
requisite: enormous velocity over almost the whole wetted per-
imeter of the Narrows. The shorter the time, the greater the re-
sults. To the writer, the features of lower Yakima Valley constitute
the final, complete, and irrefutable evidence that there was a
Spokane Flood.
The writer, at least normally sensitive to adverse criticism, has
no desire to invite attention simply by advocating extremely novel
views. Back of the repeated assertion of the verity of the Spokane
Flood lies a unique assemblage of erosional forms and glacial water
deposits; an assemblage which can be resolved into a genetic scheme
only if time be very short, volume very large, velocity very high,
and erosion chiefly by plucking of the jointed basalt. The total
published data now encompass virtually all phases of the episode
and exceed what one may readily assimilate by reading alone. It is
time for a field conference with those who still insist that normal
quantities of glacial water, operating through several Pleistocene
episodes, could produce the phenomena. The writer does not deny
a long and complicated history; he simply insists that at some time
in this history there was a catastrophic flooding across the scabland,
down the Columbia, and back into pre-existing tributary valleys.
This content downloaded from
72.233.248.81 on Sat. 03 Jun 2023 22:36:55 +00:00
All use subject to https://about.istor.org/terms
