d
p.
5,
]
b-
8:
17.
cY
15:
as.
4
Copyright © 1927 by the Washington Academy of Sciences
Reprinted from Washington Acad. Sci. Jour. 17:200-211 (1927)
CHANNELED SCABLAND AND
THE SPOKANE FLOOD
J H. Bretz
The 423d meeting was held at the Cosmos Club January 12, 1927, Presi-
dent Burts presiding. The Secretary announced the election to active
membership of W. N. WhiTe and A. M. PipER both of the U. S. Geological
Survey, and also the resignation of FRANK TwEEdY and S. W. BEYER.
Program: Professor J. Harlan BretZ, University of Chicago: Chan-
neled scabland and the Spokane food. That part of the Columbia Plateau
which lies north of Snake River in Washington bears a remarkable system of
erosional and depositional land forms. They are extraordinary in their
magnitude, in their extent and distribution, and unique in their relationships.
Running water is generally conceded to have caused them but the unparalleled
results indicate unparalleled conditions under which it acted.
The channeled scablands constitute the erosional part of the record.
They
cover almost 2000 square miles, about ‡ of the area of this part of the plateau.
They are elongate tracts, oriented with the gentle dip slope of the under-
lying basalt flows, mostly bare rock or with a thin cover of coarse basaltic
rubble, commonly with canyons in them, and are bounded by steep slopes of
the deep loessial soil of the plateau. They constitute a curious anastomosing
pattern, the down-dip convergences inherited from an earlier normal drainage
pattern and the divergencies, equally numerous, produced by crossing of
divides of this older pattern.
There are hundreds of tracts of the higher
loess-covered areas in the scablands, from a fraction of a square mile to many
townships in area, all discontinuous and bounded by the scabland areas.
The steep marginal slopes in loess are in striking contrast to the gentle slopes
of the older drainage pattern surviving within each isolated loessial tract.
Canyons in the scablands are multiple and anastomosing, amazingly so in
some tracts; deep canyons and shallow ones uniting and dividing in a labyrin-
thine fashion about bare rock knobs and buttes unlike any other land surfaces
on the earth. Certainly but few of these canyons are inherited from the
older pattern.
The scabland drainage was discharged from the northern glaciated portion
of the plateau through ten openings into the loess-covered area and led thence
by nearly one hundred different routes of varying lengths to nine discharge-
ways into Snake and Columbia rivers on the south and west. The canyon
plexus is the most striking feature of the scablands and probably is most sig-
nificant of conditions of origin. These canyons are interpreted as channels,
not valleys, hence the term "channeled scabland."
The depositional land forms associated with channeled scabland are chiefly
great mounded masses of little worn basaltic gravel.
They occur on the
down-gradient side of eminences and in other protected places in the scab-
lands, and in the Snake and Columbia valleys below the entrance of the
scabland drainage routes. They are not eroded forms, they possess aggra-
dational slopes and they inclose depressions or by their position aid in inclosing
depressions between themselves and adjacent rock walls. All attempts to
interpret them as dissected remnants of terraces or originally continuous
gravel deposits have failed. They are gravel bars of huge size.
65


201
I H. Bretz
A brief summary concerning the more significant features and relationships
follows.
CANYONS OF THe ScABLanDs. Largely channels of huge rivers, eroded
during the Spokane epoch.
A Rock basins in the canyons. Thousands of them. Commonly elon-
gate with the canyons, generally constituting the canyon floor. Lengths
as great as eight miles, depths as great as 200 feet.
Some canyon floors
essentiallv a series of rock basins. Formed by large vigorous streams plucking
the columnar basalt. In no other way can most of these basins be explained.
Some are potholes at the foot of extinct waterfalls.
B-Plexus grouping of canyons.
Occur on crossings of divides of the older
drainage pattern, the four largest groups ranging from 6 to 10 miles wide.
Developed subfluvially like the high-water anastomosing channels of the
present Columbia at the Dalles. Alternative explanation demands a remark-
ably braided pattern of an eroding stream, with narrower strands in many
cases cutting deeper than broader ones.
-Cataracts. Hundreds of extinct waterfalls, many of which during
recession became wider, several two to three miles wide. Unless the record
of very large streams, they should show the "horseshoe" concentration
from any initially great width.
AREAS SURROUNDED BY THE CHANNELED SCABLAND TRACTS. Residuals
of a once continuous loessial cover, with maturely eroded drainage ways.
100 to 200 feet of loess removed over large areas.
A-Aligned scarps of loess facing the scablands. Slopes 30° to 35°.
The bluffs left by undercutting of streams whose width was that of the adja-
cent scabland, from half a mile to 15 miles.
They truncate minor valleys
of the older drainage pattern.
B Small isolated loessial hills on the seabland. Slopes as above indicated,
with "prows" pointing up the seabland gradient.
Some are miles from any
other loess.
Others, in groups, record abrupt introduction of a large volume
of water which simultaneously entered several of the pre-Spokane drainage
ways and eroded them to bedrock, leaving these remnants of the former
divides.
TRENcHED DIVIDES. Several remarkable cases where a canyon plexus has
three or four closely spaced rock-basined gashes 200 to 400 feet deep across
a divide, yet only one case where one of them cut deeply enough to divert
subsequent drainage. Water must have been 100 to 300 feet deep above
preglacial valley bottoms on the north to have crossed. No piracy nor
headward erosion nor local drainage has been responsible. Good evidence
that no post-Spokane uplift has occurred in these places.
DEPOSITS ON THE SCABLAND AND IN SNakE AND ColuMBIa VaLLEYS.
Discontinuous originally. Their features clearly record actual building of
each individual deposit.
Any explanation must start with this.
A Gravel chiefly. Pebbles little worn, 90 to 99 per cent basalt, un-
weathered.
B. High deposits, above brink of canyons 400 feet deep and at foot of
loessial scarps, yet identieal with other deposits down in the canyons.
C Bar forms, undissected, foreset bedding conforming to slopes where
required by this hypothesis. Associated depressions as much as 50 feet deep
where vigorous eddies existed. Some bars, 20 to 100 feet high, blocked
subsequent drainage.
D-Deltaic bar, 5 miles long and 200 feet thick in Snake and Tucannon
valleys, with forests dipping up these valleys from point of entrance of
66


201
ships
roded
elon-
ingths
floors
icking
ained.
• older
wide.
of the
mark-
many
during
record
tration
siduals
1 ways.
to 35°.
e adja-
valleys
licated,
om any
volume
rainage
former
xus has
o across
o divert
p above
aev nor
evidence
ALLEYS.
ilding of
salt, un-
t foot of
IS.
es where
leet deep
blocked
cannon
rance of
202
Channeled Scabland and the Spokane Flood
scabland stream. In striking contrast with Snake River gravels imme-
diately upstream, which are in 60-foot terraces, dissected and with large
alluvial fans built out on them, and are composed of 90 to 95 per cent non-
basalt, well-rounded gravel.
E_-Quincy structural basin. More than 15 townships covered with
basaltic gravel in terrace-like and mesa-like forms. Channeled canyons
tributary to and distributary from this settling basin. The forms, however,
are bars, as field study has amply demonstrated. No interpretation as
terraces will account for many significant relationships.
ANASTOMOSIS OF ENTIRE SCABLAND TRACT ON THE PLATEAU. Contem-
poraneous occupation of all scabland routes seems indicated. No evidence
on glaciated tract of marginal drainage to supply, in turn, any one or two of
ten entrances to the scabland during any conceivable shifting of ice edge.
All channels seem to have headed on margin of the glaciated tract. Anasto-
mosis due to the huge volume of glacial water and the abrupt introduction,
thus flooding a multitude of minor drainage ways of the plateau and crossing
a multitude of minor divides.
Insufficient time for eroson of a few ade-
quately capacious spillways. Debouchure into Snake and Columbia valleys
at very different levels, indicating varying depth of different channelways
and a lowering water-level in these valleys during the discharge.
WALLULa GATEWAY HIGH-LEVEL SCABLAND. A short narrow canyon
south of junction of Snake and Columbia Rivers, 20 miles from nearest
plateau scabland. Yet with same features of subparallel lateral canyons,
rock basins, knobs and buttes as high on canyon walls as in the Snake and
Columbia upstream.
All scabland drainage passed through this canyon and
the flood reached 900 feet above present river bottom, perhaps 650 feet above
canyon bottom at beginning of Spokane episode. Constriction here caused
the ponding recorded in lower scabland tracts on plateau and made possible
the plexus crossings of divides. Erosion of Gateway canyon was rapid
enough to lower the ponded waters while the scabland rivers were still
running. No other conceivable cause of ponding is indicated elsewhere in the
Columbia valley below the plateau.
COLUMBIA VALLEY BELOW WALLULA GATEWAY. For 150 miles a descend-
ing series of scabland tracts and gravel deposits in Columbia valley.
A Bars in mouths of tributaries. Basalt gravel, ranging in height up to
600 feet above the Columbia. Delta foresets which prevailingly dip back
into tributary mouths.
B_ Portland delta, area 200 square miles, foreset-bedded throughout,
basalt, gravel channels and great bars, remarkable eddy depression on up-
stream side of a rock island in the delta.
There are many apparently possible alternative explanations for the
remarkable features of the preceding list. Virtually every one of these,
when applied, involves exceptional combinations of factors and no one of them
will explain more than one or two of the fifteen listed phenomena. Most of
them have been tested in the field and rejected. These extraordinary fea-
tures must be treated as a genetic system. Their assemblage on, and limita-
tion to, this little corner of the globe cannot be coincidence, as required by
alternative hypotheses. The only genetic interpretation yet proposed which
is inherently harmonious and which fits all known facts is that of a great
flood of water abruptly issuing from the Spokane icesheet. The unfilled rock
basins with gravel bars perched on their walls indicate abrupt cessation of
this flood
67


] H. Bretz
203
The cause of this Spokane flood is unknown. It may have been a
"Jökullaup" or glacier flood produced by subglacial vulcanism but this
hypothesis must stand or fall on field data not yet secured.
(Author's
Abstract.)
Discussion: W. C. ALDEN: Professor Bretz frankly points out the difficul-
ties met in applying his explanation of the origin of the remarkable features
of the Columbia plateau.
It is not easy for one, like myself, who has never
examined this plateau to supply offhand an alternative explanation of the
phenomena. I have read Professor Bretz's papers on the subject with
great interest but I am left with the feeling that some things essential to
the true explanation of the phenonena have not yet been found. The
"channels" appear to be due to stream erosion. The main difficulties seem to
be: (1) The idea that all the channels must have been developed simultane-
ously in a verv short time: and (2) The tremendous amount of water that he
postulates as coming from the melting of the ice sheet in so short a time to do
the work. It seems to me impossible that such part of the great ice fields as
would have drained across the Columbia plateau could, under any probable
conditions, have yielded so much water as is called for in so short a time.
It
also seems as though the estimated capacity of the Wallula Gateway, when
fully opened, is too great for this gorge to have served as a bottle neck to
hold above it a flood of such dimension to the level called for in the explana-
tion offered. It appears that ice sheets of three distinct stages of glaciation
invaded the borders of this region and may have afforded conditions of
repeated floodings of much smaller volume. It would seem that a more
extended study of the glacial phenonena is required about the heads of the
scabland "channels" to determine, if possible, more exactly just what sort of
glacio-fluvial discharge actually occurred. Perhaps the explanation of the
phenomena does not actually necessitate contemporaneous development of
all the "channels." nor in so short a time. The problem would be easier if
less water was required and if longer time and repeated floods could be
allotted to do the work.
The conditions of repeated glaciation in the basins
of Clarks Fork and the Columbia are not yet well enough understood to
afford very sure bases for postulations as to stream flow therefrom. It is
important and highly desirable that means may be provided for a more
extended study of the Pleistocene phenomena of these basins and of the
adiacent mountains
JAMES GiLLULx: The question of the existence of a Spokane flood rests on
the interpretation of many highly abnormal field facts. The evidence
presented by Professor Bretz is assuredly convincing as to (1) the anomalous,
indeed unique, drainage features of the Columbia Plateau, (2) their direct
dependence upon glacial waters, and (3) the necessarily large volume of many
of these streams. However, certain criteria used to determine the actual
quantities of water involved appear somewhat questionable. Both Russell
and Jenkins have recognized a ponded condition of the Snake River at Wallula
Gateway, but Russell has attributed it to monoclinal deformation rather than
to a flood, and, while Jenkin's views are not clear, he presumably agrees with
Russell.
Presumably then, without definite evidence to negative this theory
scoured basalt at high levels here is not conclusive of a sudden deluge of
Spokane waters. The overflow may well be much older than Spokane glacia-
tion. The evidence presented by Professor Bretz to fix the Wallula cutting
as Spokane and not earlier is the height of talus. In an article published in
1925 he pointed out that "most of the talus (at Wallula Gateway) is higher
68


203
n a
this
tor's
icul-
ures
ever
f the
with
al to
The
am to
tane-
at he
to do
Ids as
bable
e. It
when
eck to
plana-
iation
ons of
more
of the
sort of
of the
pent of
asier if
uld be
basins
tood to
. It is
a more
of the
rests on
vidence
malous,
ir direct
of many
e actual
Russell
Wallula
her than
rees with
s theory,
deluge of
le glacia-
a cutting
lished in
is higher
204
Channeled Scabland and the Spokane Flood
than three-quarters though some is typical." Thus the date of the overflow
is not fixed accurately as the date of the Spokane glaciation, even if we grant
that the three-quarter talus criterion of age elsewhere applied by him is
valid.
This talus criterion, however, is very doubtful as an accurate time gauge
on several counts: (1) The range in rainfall from point to point on the plateau
is from 5 to 20 inches.
If three-quarters talus is found at both places it
appears then that the height is probably a relatively stable stage in topo-
graphic development, rather than a measure of total elapsed time since the
cliffs were formed. (2) The validity of the criterion depends on the assump-
tion that all fragments falling from the cliffs remain in the talus heaps. This
assumption is assuredly unwarranted, for in the formation of talus rock is
disrupted into finer fragments, which waste by weathering and are subject to
removal by wind and by even the most ephemeral streams. The Colorado
Plateau offers numerous examples of cliffs which have retreated scores of
miles yet still have vertical faces. Similar tendencies must prevail here,
although basalt is decidedly more resistant than those sandstones. (3)
The well known differences in rate of weathering of canyon walls dependent
on their directional trends also give one pause in accepting uniform talus
heights as more than a very rough measure of the age of cliffs. If the talus
is of uniform height in both east-west and north-south canyons it strengthens
still farther the suggestion that the three-quarters stage of talus is relatively
stable, rather than a good time measure.
(4) Even disregarding these three
points which appear to me of great cumulative importance as tending to
throw doubt on the validity of the talus age criterion and accepting Professor
Bretz's analysis, elapsed time since a cliff was formed varies as the square
of the proportional talus heights. Seven-eights talus then means 49/36
as great age (or 134 per cent) as three-fourths talus.
Wallula Gateway,
a narrow gorge for a great river, is likely to have had its talus sapped from
time to time in its history, so that even granting that three-quarters talus is
ordinarily valid as a time measure (which for the reasons stated above is very
doubtful), the flooding of the top walls of the Gateway is probably pre-
Spokane, and the deepening of the canyon a much longer process than granted
by Bretz. This idea is strengthened by considering the quantitative factor.
According to Bretz's old measurements the discharge at Wallula Gateway
was 38.9 cubic miles per day, or over 50 times the present flood volumes of
the Columbia and, proportionally to drainage basin, over 200 times as large
as the greatest recorded floods of the Mississippi. Now he believes the water
regched even greater height and hence must have produced a still greater
food. To explain this great flood without retreat of the ice front, he has
suggested-(1) a very sudden climatic amelioration (only to rule it out as
verv improbable) and (2) that subglacial voleanism resulted in sudden
melting of large quantities of ice which formed the flood. This mechanism
is wholly inadequate as, even allowing most generous thermal properties for
basalt and perfect efficiency of transfer of this heat for melting the ice, even a
10-day flood would require 17 cubie miles of basalt or a layer about 9 feet thick
over 10,000 square miles. Further computations show that the rate of
cooling of basalt is so slow that if we assume the subglacial surface replaced
by molten basalt it would require over 9,700 square miles of basalt exposure
beneath the ice to produce only 350 cubic miles of water which would only
maintain the flood postulated by Bretz for ten days. But the areal geology
of the Columbia basin is sufficiently well known to completely eliminate any
possibility of late Pleistocene volcanism of such magnitude. Even this
69


] H. Bretz
205
preposterously low estimate of flood duration is eliminated by the physical
factors (such as resistance of basalt, depth of channels above Wallula re-
ferred to that constriction and others) involved. How much less competent
then, must we admit is the jokullaup hypothesis to furnish the tremendous
flood volume postulated by Bretz.
The incompetence of the postulated
mechanism to furnish the flood volume required by Bretz's interpretations
of the field evidence seems to call for a reinterpretation of that evidence.
That, as suggested by G. O. Smith, Meinzer, and Ferguson, such a reinter-
pretation is apt to be considerably more complex than the suggested flood
hypothesis, seems exceedingly probable. That the actual floods involved
at any given time were of the order of magnitude of the present Columbia's,
or at most a few times as large, seems by no means excluded by any evidence
as yet presented.
E. T. McKNIGHT: Three dry coulees cut southwestward from the "Othello
channels" at the cast end of the Saddle Mountains in central Washington
across the aggraded surface of the Ringold formation and debouche at varying
elevations as hanging valleys along the White Bluffs of the Columbia.
All are
markedly U-shaped in cross section.
The master channel of the three is
Koontz Coulee which debouches at Ringold at an elevation of 150 feet above
the river. It is 11 miles wide in its lower and better defined portion and its
bed lies from 200 to 300 feet below the flat undissected Ringold plain which
borders it abruptly on the northwest. In its upper half it has cut through the
soft Ringold sediments and has exposed the underlying basalt in the form of
scablands. The two remaining dry coulees are of comparable size, averaging
less than half a mile in width and from 75 to 150 feet in depth, much smaller
than Koontz Coulee. They head at essentially the same point in the west
rim of Koontz Coulee, 10 miles above its mouth, at an elevation of 250 feet
above its bed, and after following divergent courses reach the bluff of the
Columbia at points 2 and 15 miles, respectively, above the mouth of Koontz
Coulce and at elevations of 425 and 300 feet, respectively, above the Colum-
bia. Both in turn show remnants of still shallower braided channels at
higher levels, appearing as short shunts off of the primary channels.
The
southernmost dry coulee maintains its U-shape practically up to the point
where its profile breaks off abruptly to the level of the Columbia; the enclosing
walls of the northern coulee, on the contrary, begin to recede diagonally and
to flatten at a point 5 miles back from the river so that the incised character
of the coulee is soon lost, though the old drainage line can still be traced
through to the bluff overlooking the town of White Bluffs.
That all three of the dry coulees above described were produced under
climatic conditions widely different from those prevailing at the present time
is amply proved by the sage-covered depressions in the two smaller coulees,
and by the scattered depressions in the upper regions of Koontz Coulee. Mr.
Bretz has interpreted these dry coulees as the product of huge glacial torrents
that emptied into the Columbia when its flood waters stood at or slightly
above the levels of the present debouchures of the coulees. That these are
at different levels is believed to be due to the different stages in which they
were abandoned during the lowering of the flood of the Columbia, Koontz
Coulce being the last one abandoned. The bed of the river at the time of
this flood is believed to have been at essentially its present level. The
writer believes that the three dry coulees were formed by glacial waters at a
time when the Columbia lay several miles west of its present channel and
have been converted into hanging valleys by the lateral shift of the river to
the east against the soft sediments of the White Bluffs. That this lateral
70


205
physical
allula re-
ompetent
mendous
ostulated
retations
evidence.
a reinter-
sted flood
involved
slumbia's.
evidence
e "Othello
ashington
at varying
a.
All are
le three is
feet above
ion and its
lain which
hrough the
the form of
averaging
uch smaller
in the west
of 250 feet
bluff of the
h of Koontz
the Colum-
channels at
nnels. The
o the point
he enclosing
gonally and
ed character
ill be traced
duced under
present time
aller coulees,
Coulee.
Mr.
acial torrents
at or slightly
hat these are
n which they
mbia, Koontz
t the time of
t level. The
al waters at a
+ channel and
of the river to
at this lateral
206
Channeled Scabland and the Spokane Flood
shift is a reality is proved by the vigorous manner in which the river is at
present undercutting the bluff, producing numerous land slides, and by the
fact that the Ringold formation of pre-glacial Pleistocene age, has been
largely removed by lateral planation from the region west of the river although
it formerly filled the basin as far west and southwest as the Yakima and
Rattlesnake ranges, 15 to 20 miles southwest of the White Bluffs. The shift
of the river is down the slope of the pre-Ringold basalt floor. Restoration
of the profile of Koontz Coulee indicates that the Columbia lay 3 miles west
of its present position when the coulee was formed.
The two smaller coulees
at the higher level are interpreted as distributaries formed when Koontz.
Coulee lav at that level and abandoned after it had gained the mastery.
It is believed that the explanation of Mr. Bretz is inadequate to explain
(1) the fact that the two smaller dry coulees previously described, although
heading at the same place, reach the White Bluffs above the Columbia at
different elevations; (2) the fact that a V-shaped valley along the southern
base of the Saddle Mountains, which was produced entirely by drainage off
of the southern slope of the mountains, also forms a hanging valley 275 feet
above the Columbia, although in this case, as with the northernmost glacial
coulee, the south slope of the valley breaks back several miles from the river
so that the lower course of the old drainage is almost obliterated. Mr. Bretz
interprets the coarse stream gravels and cobbles that cover extensive areas
west of the river at White Bluffs and Hanford as the debris of the Spokane
flood.
The writer believes them to be the normal channel deposits of the
Columbia during its eastward shift over the area in pre-glacial, glacial, and
post-glacial times.
The features described in this summary appear on the
Scootenay Lake, Hanford and Coyote Rapids quadrangles.
G. R. MANSFIELD: Mr. Bretz cites the occurrence of numerous anastomos-
ions, carvel in basalsociated sock ba sins some of which are 8 miles or more
as deep as 400 feet; he notes the occurrence of hundreds of abandoned water-
falls with "potholes" at their bases, also in basalt, and speaks of the recession
of some of these falls; and yet he ascribes all these phenomena to a single flood
of relatively brief duration. Basalt is a hard rock and very resistant to
corrasion, but it possesses a well known columnar jointing, which supposedly
renders it susceptible to undermining and to plucking, and Mr. Bretz relies
on this property to account for the unprecedented rapidity of erosion of the
basalt which his hypothesis requires. I am not convinced that so much work
could be done on basalt in so short a time, even by such a flood as is postu-
lated. The Dalles of the Columbia, which Mr. Bretz says are typical scab-
land channels, and the various falls in Snake River, can furnish pertinent and
definite evidence with regard to rapidity of erosion and of the recession of
falls in basalt if systematic observations are carried on for a few years. It
does not seem to me necessary to assume that all the scabland channels, or
even that all parts of the same channels were occupied by water at the same
time. Mr. Bretz notes that deep and shallow canyons unite and divide in
labyrinthine fashion. Possibly some of the shallower channels were formed
earlier than some of the others and now hang on the sides of more favorably
located channels. Mr. Bretz based much of his argument for contem-
poraniety of all the channel phenomena upon the relative heights of talus
piles beneath basaltic cliffs along the canyon sides. Probably few, if any,
direct observations are available regarding the rate at which talus piles in
basalt may form. From such observations as I have made in basaltic country
in the past fifteen years I should say that the rate is so slow that considerable
71


J H. Bretz
207
time intervals would fail to register significant differences. Such a measuring
stick should not be applied too rigidly.
Again contemporaneity of erosion
can not well be assumed from the identity of materials composing high level
and low level gravel bars. Since all the material, high or low, may be pre-
sumed to have come from much the same general sources, identity is to be
expected. Some differences in state of weathering might be looked for if the
time interval between high level and low level deposits was great, but even
here other factors such as texture and mineral composition of the rock frag-
ments would enter in and mere differences in weathering would not be con-
clusive. The general nature of the phenomena suggests conditions similar
to those attending the ice front in New York State, where temporary channels
and falls now abandoned were developed. Although these were temporary,
geologically speaking, some of them appear to have persisted for long periods
of years. The scablands seem to me better explained as the effects of per-
sistent ponding and overflow of marginal glacial waters, which changed their
position or their places of outlet from time to time through a somewhat pro-
tracted period.
Not enough is known in detail of the glacial geology and
physiography of the region to furnish an adequate basis for any connected
story of events here.
The hypothesis of a single tremendous flood should not
be accepted without further detailed regional study.
O. E. MEINZER: I have seen only the part of the region under discussion,
that including Quincy Valley, Grand Coulee, and Moses Coulee. As Doctor
Bretz has stated, the erosion features of the region are so large and bizarre
that they defy description. However, the Columbia River is a very large
stream, especially in its flood stages, and it was doubtless still larger in the
Pleistocene epoch. Its erosive work in the Grand Coulee and Quincy Valley,
impressive though it is, appears to me about what would be expected from a
stream of such size when diverted from its valley and poured for a long time
over a surface of considerable relief that was wholly unadjusted to it.
The
dry falls in the Grand Coulee resemble Niagara Falls and are evidently the
product of normal stream work. The deep gorge of the coulce below the dry
falls was apparently excavated by the same orderly and long-continued proc-
ess of head-end erosion as the gorge below Niagara Falls, and it could hardly
have been produced in a short time by a flood of whatever magnitude.
Quincy Valley, into which the waters of the Grand Coulee discharged, evi-
dently became the scene of a lake in which sediments were deposited and which
at first discharged westward into the valley of Columbia River, forming
several cataracts that retreated some distance in normal fashion hefore they
were abandoned. Later all the water was discharged through the present
outlet, the lake was drained, and the stream cut into the sedimentary deposits
in Quincy Valley to a depth of about 150 feet, forming a broad stream valley
with a series of extensive terraces. All these were orderly and long-continued
processes of erosion and sedimentation. The features of erosion and deposi-
tion are indeed very impressive, but they are, I believe, of a kind and size that
would be expected from so large a river as the Columbia must have been in
the Pleistocene epoch. The rock-eut terraces of the Columbia River Valley
also indicate a succession of long periods of stream erosion.
The short
level and 400 to 500 feet above the present river level. The floor of Moses
Coulee is continuous with a terrace 800 to 900 feet above sea level and about
300 feet above the river. Though the evidence is perhaps not conclusive, it
seems to me that the upper of these two terraces represents the floor of the
72


on
rel
re-
be
he
en
ag-
On-
lar
jels
гУ,
ods
)eT-
heir
010-
and
sted
not
joD,
ctor
arre
arge
1 the
lley,
om 3
time
The
y the
e dry
proc-
ardly
tude.
1, evi-
which
rming
e they
resent
posits
valley
tinued
leposi-
ze that
been in
Valley
short
Quincy
ove sea
Moses
I about
isive, it
r of the
208
Channeled Scabland and the Spokane Flood
Columbia River Valley before the river was diverted to form the Grand
Coulee and the lake in Quincy Valley, the lower terrace represents the floor of
the Columbia River Valley at a later time when the Moses Coulee was cut,
and the gorge below the lower terrace represents the later erosion work of
the Columbia
Having seen only this part of the region, in which I believe the existing
features can be explained by assuming normal stream work of the ancient
Columbia River, I am naturally loath to accept a theory of an abnormal flood
for the scablands farther east.
Before a theory that requires a seemingly
impossible quantity of water is fully accepted, every effort should be made to
account for the existing features without employing so violent an assumption.
I suggest that full weight be given to the following considerations, all of
which have, of course, already received careful study by Dr. Bretz: 1. The
Pleistocene Columbia was necessarily a very large stream, especially in times
of flood. 2. Its waters were diverted over country of considerable relief
that was wholly unadjusted to it. 3. It is probably not necessary to assume
that all of the region was channelled simultaneously. Is it not more probable
that the water flowed successively over different tracts as the ice front
changed? 4. Unless there is conclusive proof, it should not be assumed
that along any drainage line the erosion work at high and low levels was done
simultancously. It would seem more probable that the work of erosion
proceeded during a long time and that the high-level channels were abandoned
as the stream cut down to lower levels. 5. Tilting and folding of the rocks
have in this region occurred in recent geologic time, probably during and
since the cutting of the Pleistocene channels. For example, there seems to
be evidence that the upper terrace of the Columbia River Valley has been
deformed. This recent deformation may account to some extent for channels
cut through ridges that can not otherwise be well explained except by as-
suming excessive depths of flood water.
J. T. PARDEE: Other things being equal, the amount of talus beneath a
cliff would vary considerably according to whether the exposure faced toward
or away from the sun. Disruption of the rock duc to temperature changes
and alternate freezing and thawing of water would be most effective on
southern exposures.
DR. BRETZ: Reply to Mr. Gilluly: There are old weathered gravels down
in Snake River canyon both above and below the entrance of the scabland
rivers, and much lower than the upper limit reached by the glacial waters in
this canyon. The canyon therefore is older than the Spokane episode or any
gravel deposits in the scablands, and a canyon at Wallula Gateway must have
been there in pre-scabland time. I believe that the field evidence for this
conclusion would convince any of my critics.
Scabland and gravel up on the
walls of the Gateway do not date back to the initiation of the canyon, and
some sort of ponding must be provided. Without a ponding episode, the
upper scabland must be older than the tributary canyons at the Gateway.
But even the map shows how the glacial waters cut up the shoulders between
the small tributary canyons already in existence. A pre-scabland floor of
the Gateway about 200 feet above present river level is suggested by the
hanging condition of Spring Gulch. Russell's speculations on ponding in
the Columbia Valley dealt with the berg-carried erratics, not with scabland,
and called for a valley glacier down in the gorge at or near The Dalles, or for
a subsidence of the entire region.
I have believed that this second suggestion
is correct.
There is a possibility that final solution of the scabland problem
will tie this berg-drift into the scabland story. Jenkins did not suggest any
73


I H. Bretz
209
disagreement with my bottle-neck hypothesis, though his article was avowedly
a discussion of the ponding. There are certain to be differences in talus
height because of local variations such as I have indicated in one of my
papers. But where these differences are definitely traceable to local factors,
such as variations in basaltic structures or spill of local runoff over the cliff
or an active stream in the valley below or other conditions, it seems per-
missible to so treat them and yet to draw generalizations. The blocky
material on the surface of talus in the scablands indicates a rate of growth in
excess of the rate of disintegration into fine material. Bryan has indicated
this in one of his papers on Pedestal Rocks. Comparison with sandstone
cliffs is hardly trustworthy. It is much more likely that talus accumulations
in the scablands have been added to, rather than diminished, by wind action.
And in the empty channels I do not believe that removal of talus material
by any process has occurred in appreciable amount in post-scabland times.
Furthermore, the unfilled basins of the channeled scablands, existing even
close to the upper limits of glacial waters in Wallula Gateway, have lingered
overlong for a region whose talus has reached a profile of equilibrium. I have
not considered "equilibrium" attained until the talus covers the whole face
of a cliff.
A soil from disintegration of the basalt should cover a stable
talus, and this is essentially lacking in the seablands or at the Gateway.
The "jökullaup" sub-hypothesis I never have defended and never shall,
until adequate field evidence from the required volcanic tract is forthcoming.
But must it be dismissed because of Mr. Gilluly's computations? Are they
conclusive? After indicating the untrustworthiness of figures, because of
possible overlooked factors not represented in the computations, Gilluly
moves into the very position I am scolded for taking. And the accounts of
Icelandic jokullaup are they merely early experiments in sensational
journalism? Granting, however, that we must never again look toward
subglacial vulcanism for a Spokane flood, must this close our minds to the
flood hypothesis? I believe that my interpretation of channeled scabland
should stand or fall on the scabland phenomena themselves. Perhaps, how-
ever, my attitude of dogmatic finality is proving contagious. I am glad to
have convinced Mr. Gilluly that the seabland high up on the Gateway walls
is stream work. I anticipated a skeptical attitude on even this point, for it
is an extraordinary place for scabland, by any hypothesis for the great system
on the plateau north of Snake River.
The only known records for pre-
Spokane ice on the plateau are about Spokane and Cheney where there is a
weathered till beneath the Palouse loess. The whole record of glacial waters
across the plateau and through the Gateway is post-loess! I do not yet share
Gilluly's belief that pre-Spokane glacial waters are recorded in the Gateway,
nor his confidence that the history can be diagnosed readily at long distance.
Even a bed-side practitioner may err, _ understand.
Reply to Mr. McKnight: Undoubtedly the Columbia has undercut White
Bluffs and thus shortened Koontz Coulee. But its eastward shift is not down
the slope of a pre-Ringold basalt floor. The basalt is at least 100 feet below
the river surface at Ringold, at the foot of White Bluffs.
And Gable Moun-
tain, a rugged eminence five miles long and at least 700 feet above the river,
stands in the eastern half of the tract which the river, by this conception, has
made by lateral planation. Jenkins thinks that the Ringold silt underlies
the gravel of this wide part of the Columbia Valley. The 200-foot range in
altitude of the gravel deposits about Gable Butte and Gable Mountain
appears to be wholly in material of the same age. If the gravels of this part
of Columbia Valley are normal affairs of valley or channel deepening, the
74


209
avowedly
s in talus
ne of my
al factors,
or the cliff
seems per-
he blocky
growth in
; indicated
sandstone
imulations
ind action.
is material
land times.
isting even
ve lingered
m. Ihave
• whole face
rer a stable
e Gateway.
never shall,
orthcoming.
? Are they
because of
ions, Gilluly
accounts of
sensational
look toward
minds to the
led scabland
erhaps, how-
I am glad to
tateway walls
s point, for it
• great system
cords for pre-
here there is a
glacial waters
› not yet share
the Gateway,
long distance.
ndercut White
lift is not down
100 feet below
a Gable Moun-
bove the river,
conception, has
d silt underlies
10-foot rarge in
able Mountain
vels of this part
deepening, the
210
Channeled Scabland and the Spokane Flood
older and higher portions should lie successively farther west from White
Bluffs. But no suocession of terraces of different ages has been found;
instead, the relief appears to be a matter of great bars and abandoned chan-
nels with "holes" in them as low as present river level, all disposed with
reference to the two basaltic interruptions as they should be if the entire
valley at one time were a river bottom. While the main floor of Koontz
Coulee hangs only 150 feet above the Columbia, three other glacial spillways,
all within a mile and a half of the mouth of Koontz Coulee, hang 250 to 400
feet above, and all have approximately the same gradient. If their profiles
are proiected, they will reach at least twice as far out into Columbia Valley.
By Mr. McKnight's explanation, there must have been as much lateral
planation by the Columbia while the glacial waters were using Othello
Channels as in all subsequent time. This projection of profiles assumes a
Columbia River bottom, at about 500 feet A. T. at that time. How Othello
Channels and its distributaries (Koontz, etc.) could have discharged across
the Ringold flat at an upper limit of 1150 + while the Crab Creek syncline
was undoubtedly an open route (for it also carried the glacial waters) to the
capacious Columbia Valley is a puzzle for which I have found no answer
save great volume and ponding at Wallula Gateway. If my information were
limited to this district alone, I probably would not have arrived at present
interpretations. It is in the remarkable interrelationships of the channeled
scabland ensemble that the conception of a Spokane flood finds support.
Reply to Mr. Mansfield: I have had no success in fitting the field evidence
to the idea of shifting dischargeways across the scablands.
I cannot get the
glacial streams to cross at Palouse Canyon, Devils Canyon, etc., without a
ponding farther down the Columbia, nor to cut the canyons or canyon
groups at these separated places without maintaining all dischargeways while
the ponded condition is being removed. A labyrinthine group admittedly
records a succession of events in that the glacial river was drawn down from
original wide spreading as the canyons were eroded. But such cutting
apparently must be done while the Wallula ponding was being lowered, or
else that ponding must be repeated for each successive epoch of occupation.
Onlv the Moses Coulee and Grand Coulee-Drumheller Channels plexus groups
would have developed without the backing up postulated. Mr. Mansfield's
idea of obtaining the rate of erosion of the basalt at The Dalles is excellent,
but probably can be applied only to the features exposed at low water, and
altered only during high water. The deeper and inaccessible parts of such a
channel group should be the most rapidly changed. I hope that Mr. Mans-
field and others of the United States Geological Survey will be able some time
to study the channeled scablands in detail. These features should take their
place in the literature as a group of land forms without parallel, and a genesis
that can be agreed upon should be established
Reply to Mr. Meinser: The erosion of Grand Coulee could not have taken
a longer time than the sum of whatever glacial stream occupation it has had.
The margin of the ice sheet must have remained within 35 miles of its maxi-
mum advance in order to produce the Grand Coulee diversion. We may
multiply whatever time interval this represents by different glaciations to get
a longer period but it does not seem possible to consider this canyon a normal
product of long-continued stream erosion. The scabland plexus east of
Grand Coulee, from Coulee City south to the Quincy basin, is certainly not a.
normal affair, for three pre-existing valleys were entered and much eroded by
glacial waters from the north before depening of the lower coulee occurred
sufficiently to contain the discharge. The lake sediments of Quincy Valley
75


J H. Bretz
211
lie beneath thick basaltic gravel deposits which are disposed, as in so many
other places in the channeled scablands, in great mounds, several miles long,
with gentle back slopes and side slopes that are constructional profiles. These
are separated b three wide channels of contemporaneous origin, leading
from Crab Creek and Grand Coulee across the basin to Drumheller Channels.
My earlier interpretations were that these channels (Moses Lake lies in one
of them) were dissected out of a once-continuous gravel fill, but many features
could not be harmonized with this, and I have been trying the Spokane Flood
idea since. Several years ago Mr. Meinzer suggested to me that tilting or
some other adequate cause had diverted discharge from The Potholes and
Frenchman Springs cataract to Drumheller Channels, and I have tried since
to apply this in the field. But I cannot find any evidence to support it.
The rock terraces of Columbia Valley to which Mr. Meinzer refers were there
in present development when the Flood occurred. The prominent one at the
Potholes aleove rises northward along the Columbia about 300 feet in four
miles. The surface of the southern part of it, below about 1250 A. T., is
typical scabland and has a sharply defined cliff back of it. The northern
part, above the level of the flood as indicated by upper limits in all three
spillways out of Quincy basin, carries no such record and has no bare rock in
the cliff back of it. Slope of the cliff and talus, which is soil covered to the
very top, indicate a much older feature. As Professor Davis would say, the
cliff in its southern part has been "refresht." This northward rise of the rock
terrace is due to the warping in Babcock Ridge, a low anticlinal into which
the Columbia has eut its valley. That rock terrace was here, in its present
warped condition, I think, before the glacial discharge occurred. The close
approximation of upper flood limit on this terrace, in the two cataracts
named and in Drumheller Channels seems to indicate that no warping com-
parable to what the terrace shows has occurred since the glacial flood. This
is also the upper limit of scabland in Wallula Gateway.
The upper limits in
such widely spaced features as Othello Channels, Devils Canyon and Snake
River Canyon do not vary more than 100 feet from 1250.
There is, of course,
no precise marker in the topography for upper limits, for most of these features
are river-bottom forms, but I do not think my figures miss it by more than
100 feet. Such coincidence of altitudes as I have indicated is remarkable if
different episodes are involved or if the region has been warped since Spokane
time. Moses Coulee below Three Devils abandoned cataract has 200 feet
or more of debris, mostly gravel, on the rock floor which therefore is as low as
in Columbia Valley at the junction of the two valleys.
W. P. WoODRING, W. W. RUBEY, Secretaries.
76
